<h2>PREFACE TO THE FOURTH AMERICAN EDITION</h2>
<p>If this, the fourth American edition, is bulkier than
its predecessors, it is chiefly because the events of the
last two years throw an interesting light upon the
bearing of the book's main thesis on actual world
problems. I have, therefore, added an appendix
dealing with certain criticisms based upon the nature
of the first Balkan War, in the course of which I
attempt to show just how the principles elaborated
here have been working out in European politics.</p>
<p>That American interest in the problems here discussed
is hardly less vital than that of Europe I am
even more persuaded than when the first American
edition of this book was issued in 1910. It is certain
that opinion in America will not be equipped for
dealing with her own problems arising out of her
relations with the Spanish American states, with
Japan, with the Philippines, unless it has some fair
understanding of the principles with which this book
deals. Its general interest even goes farther than
this: no great community like that of modern
America can remain indifferent to the drift of general
opinion throughout the world on matters wrapped up
with issues so important as those of war and peace.</p>
<p>That the tangible commercial and business interests
of America are involved in these European
events is obvious from the very factors of financial
and commercial interdependence which form the
basis of the argument.</p>
<p>That the interests of Americans are inextricably,
if indirectly, bound up with those of Europe, has
become increasingly clear as can be proved by the
barest investigation of the trend of political thought
in this country.</p>
<p>The thesis on its economic side is discussed in
terms of the gravest problem which now faces European
statesmanship, but these terms are also the
living symbols of a principle of universal application,
as true with reference to American conditions as to
European. If I have not "localized" the discussion
by using illustrations drawn from purely American
cases, it is because these problems have not at present,
in the United States, reached the acute stage that
they have in Europe, and illustrations drawn from
the conditions of an actual and pressing problem give
to any discussion a reality which to some extent it
might lose if discussed on the basis of more supposititious
cases.</p>
<p>It so happens, however, that in the more abstract
section of the discussion embraced in the second
part, which I have termed the "Human Nature of the
Case," I have gone mainly to American authors for
the statement of cases based on those illusions with
which the book deals.</p>
<p>For this edition I have thought it worth while
thoroughly to revise the whole of the book and to
re-write the chapter on the payment of the French
Indemnity, in order to clear up a misunderstanding
to which in its first form it gave rise. Part III has
also been re-written, in order to meet the changed
form of criticism which has resulted from the discussion
of this subject during the last year or two.</p>
<p>It is with very great regret that I have seen this
book grow in bulk; but as it constitutes the statement
of a thesis still revolutionary, it has to cover
the whole ground of the discussion, sometimes in
great detail. I have, however, adopted an arrangement
and method of presentation by which, I trust,
the increase in bulk will not render it less clear. The
general arrangement is as follows:</p>
<p>The Synopsis is a very brief indication of the scope
of the whole argument, which is not that war is
impossible, but that it is futile—useless, even when
completely victorious, as a means of securing those
moral or material ends which represent the needs of
modern civilized peoples; and that on a general
realization of this truth depends the solution of the
problem of armaments and warfare.</p>
<p>The general economic argument is summarized in
Chapter III., Part I.</p>
<p>The moral, psychological, and biological argument
is summarized in Chapter II., Part II.</p>
<p>The practical outcome—what should be our policy
with reference to defence, why progress depends upon
the improvement of public opinion and the best
general methods of securing that—is discussed in
Part III.</p>
<p>This method of treatment has involved some small
repetition of fact and illustration, but the repetition
is trifling in bulk—it does not amount in all to the
value of more than three or four pages—and I have
been more concerned to make the matter in hand
clear to the reader than to observe all the literary
canons. I may add that, apart from this, the process
of condensation has been carried to its extreme limit
for the character of data dealt with, and that those
who desire to understand thoroughly the significance
of the thesis with which the book deals—it is worth
understanding—had really better read every line of
it!</p>
<p>One personal word may perhaps be excused as
explaining certain phraseology, which would seem to
indicate that the author is of English nationality.
He happens to be of English birth, but to have passed
his youth and early manhood in the United States,
having acquired American citizenship there. This
I hope entitles him to use the collective "we" on
both sides of the Atlantic. I may add that the last
fifteen years have been passed mainly in Europe
studying at first hand the problems here dealt with.</p>
<p>N.A.</p>
<p>London, October, 1913.</p>
<h2>PREFACE</h2>
<p>The present volume is the outcome of a large
pamphlet published in Europe at the end
of last year entitled <i>Europe's Optical Illusion</i>.
The interest that the pamphlet created and the
character of the discussion provoked throughout
Europe persuaded me that its subject-matter was
worth fuller and more detailed treatment than then
given it. Herewith the result of that conviction.
The thesis on its economic side is discussed in the
terms of the gravest problem which now faces
European statesmanship, but these terms are also
the living symbols of a principle of universal
application, as true with reference to American
conditions as to European. If I have not "localized"
the discussion by using illustrations drawn
from purely American cases, it is because these
problems have not at present in the United States
reached the acute stage that they have in Europe,
and illustrations drawn from the conditions of an
actual and pressing problem give to any discussion
a reality which to some extent it might lose if
discussed on the basis of more suppositious cases.</p>
<p>It so happens, however, that in the more abstract
section of the discussion embraced in the second
part, which I have termed the "Human Nature of
the Case," I have gone mainly to American authors
for the statement of cases based on those
illusions with which the book deals.</p>
<p>N.A.</p>
<p>Paris, August, 1910.</p>
<h2>SYNOPSIS</h2>
<p>What are the fundamental motives that explain
the present rivalry of armaments in Europe, notably
the Anglo-German? Each nation pleads the need
for defence; but this implies that someone is likely
to attack, and has therefore a presumed interest in
so doing. What are the motives which each State
thus fears its neighbors may obey?</p>
<p>They are based on the universal assumption that
a nation, in order to find outlets for expanding population
and increasing industry, or simply to ensure
the best conditions possible for its people, is necessarily
pushed to territorial expansion and the exercise
of political force against others (German naval
competition is assumed to be the expression of the
growing need of an expanding population for a
larger place in the world, a need which will find a
realization in the conquest of English Colonies or
trade, unless these are defended); it is assumed,
therefore, that a nation's relative prosperity is
broadly determined by its political power; that
nations being competing units, advantage, in the
last resort, goes to the possessor of preponderant
military force, the weaker going to the wall, as in the
other forms of the struggle for life.</p>
<p>The author challenges this whole doctrine. He
attempts to show that it belongs to a stage of development
out of which we have passed; that the commerce
and industry of a people no longer depend upon the
expansion of its political frontiers; that a nation's
political and economic frontiers do not now necessarily
coincide; that military power is socially and
economically futile, and can have no relation to the
prosperity of the people exercising it; that it is impossible
for one nation to seize by force the wealth
or trade of another—to enrich itself by subjugating,
or imposing its will by force on another; that, in
short, war, even when victorious, can no longer
achieve those aims for which peoples strive.</p>
<p>He establishes this apparent paradox, in so far as
the economic problem is concerned, by showing that
wealth in the economically civilized world is founded
upon credit and commercial contract (these being the
outgrowth of an economic interdependence due to
the increasing division of labor and greatly developed
communication). If credit and commercial contract
are tampered with in an attempt at confiscation,
the credit-dependent wealth is undermined, and its
collapse involves that of the conqueror; so that if
conquest is not to be self-injurious it must respect
the enemy's property, in which case it becomes
economically futile. Thus the wealth of conquered
territory remains in the hands of the population of
such territory. When Germany annexed Alsatia,
no individual German secured a single mark's worth
of Alsatian property as the spoils of war. Conquest
in the modern world is a process of multiplying by
<i>x</i>, and then obtaining the original figure by dividing
by <i>x</i>. For a modern nation to add to its territory
no more adds to the wealth of the people of such
nation than it would add to the wealth of Londoners
if the City of London were to annex the county of
Hertford.</p>
<p>The author also shows that international finance
has become so interdependent and so interwoven
with trade and industry that the intangibility of an
enemy's property extends to his trade. It results
that political and military power can in reality do
nothing for trade; the individual merchants and
manufacturers of small nations, exercising no such
power, compete successfully with those of the great.
Swiss and Belgian merchants drive English from the
British Colonial market; Norway has, relatively to
population, a greater mercantile marine than Great
Britain; the public credit (as a rough-and-ready
indication, among others, of security and wealth)
of small States possessing no political power often
stands higher than that of the Great Powers of
Europe, Belgian Three per Cents. standing at 96,
and German at 82; Norwegian Three and a Half per
Cents. at 102, and Russian Three and a Half per
Cents. at 81.</p>
<p>The forces which have brought about the economic
futility of military power have also rendered it
futile as a means of enforcing a nation's moral ideals
or imposing social institutions upon a conquered
people. Germany could not turn Canada or
Australia into German colonies—<i>i.e.</i>, stamp out
their language, law, literature, traditions, etc.—by
"capturing" them. The necessary security in
their material possessions enjoyed by the inhabitants
of such conquered provinces, quick inter-communication
by a cheap press, widely-read literature, enable
even small communities to become articulate and
effectively to defend their special social or moral
possessions, even when military conquest has been
complete. The fight for ideals can no longer take
the form of fight between nations, because the lines
of division on moral questions are within the nations
themselves and intersect the political frontiers.
There is no modern State which is completely Catholic
or Protestant, or liberal or autocratic, or aristocratic
or democratic, or socialist or individualist; the
moral and spiritual struggles of the modern world
go on between citizens of the same State in unconscious
intellectual co-operation with corresponding
groups in other States, not between the public
powers of rival States.</p>
<p>This classification by strata involves necessarily
a redirection of human pugnacity, based rather on
the rivalry of classes and interests than on State
divisions. War has no longer the justification that
it makes for the survival of the fittest; it involves
the survival of the less fit. The idea that the struggle
between nations is a part of the evolutionary law
of man's advance involves a profound misreading of
the biological analogy.</p>
<p>The warlike nations do not inherit the earth; they
represent the decaying human element. The diminishing
rôle of physical force in all spheres of human
activity carries with it profound psychological
modifications.</p>
<p>These tendencies, mainly the outcome of purely
modern conditions (<i>e.g.</i> rapidity of communication),
have rendered the problems of modern international
politics profoundly and essentially different from the
ancient; yet our ideas are still dominated by the
principles and axioms, images and terminology of
the bygone days.</p>
<p>The author urges that these little-recognized facts
may be utilized for the solution of the armament
difficulty on at present untried lines—by such
modification of opinion in Europe that much of the
present motive to aggression will cease to be operative,
and by thus diminishing the risk of attack,
diminishing to the same extent the need for defence.
He shows how such a political reformation is within
the scope of practical politics, and the methods
which should be employed to bring it about.</p>
<h2>PART I</h2>
<p>THE ECONOMICS OF THE CASE</p>
<h3>CHAPTER I</h3>
<p>STATEMENT OF THE ECONOMIC CASE FOR WAR</p>
<blockquote><p>Where can the Anglo-German rivalry of armaments end?—Why
peace advocacy fails—Why it deserves to fail—The attitude
of the peace advocate—The presumption that the prosperity
of nations depends upon their political power, and consequent
necessity of protection against aggression of other nations
who would diminish our power to their advantage—These
the universal axioms of international politics.</p></blockquote>
<p>It is generally admitted that the present rivalry in
armaments in Europe—notably such as that now in
progress between England and Germany—cannot go
on in its present form indefinitely. The net result of
each side meeting the efforts of the other with similar
efforts is that at the end of a given period the relative
position of each is what it was originally, and the
enormous sacrifices of both have gone for nothing. If
as between England and Germany it is claimed that
England is in a position to maintain the lead because
she has the money, Germany can retort that she is in
a position to maintain the lead because she has the
population, which must, in the case of a highly
organized European nation, in the end mean money.
Meanwhile, neither side can yield to the other, as the
one so doing would, it is felt, be placed at the mercy
of the other, a situation which neither will accept.</p>
<p>There are two current solutions which are offered
as a means of egress from this <i>impasse</i>. There is that
of the smaller party, regarded in both countries for
the most part as one of dreamers and doctrinaires,
who hope to solve the problem by a resort to general
disarmament, or, at least, a limitation of armament
by agreement. And there is that of the larger, which
is esteemed the more practical party, of those who are
persuaded that the present state of rivalry and recurrent
irritation is bound to culminate in an armed
conflict, which, by definitely reducing one or other
of the parties to a position of manifest inferiority,
will settle the thing for at least some time, until after
a longer or shorter period a state of relative equilibrium
is established, and the whole process will be
recommenced <i>da capo</i>.</p>
<p>This second solution is, on the whole, accepted as
one of the laws of life: one of the hard facts of existence
which men of ordinary courage take as all in the
day's work. And in every country those favoring
the other solution are looked upon either as people
who fail to realize the hard facts of the world in
which they live, or as people less concerned with the
security of their country than with upholding a somewhat
emasculate ideal; ready to weaken the defences
of their own country on no better assurance than that
the prospective enemy will not be so wicked as to
attack them.</p>
<p>To this the virile man is apt to oppose the law of
conflict. Most of what the nineteenth century has
taught us of the evolution of life on the planet is
pressed into the service of this struggle-for-life
philosophy. We are reminded of the survival of the
fittest, that the weakest go to the wall, and that all
life, sentient and non-sentient, is but a life of battle.
The sacrifice involved in armament is the price which
nations pay for their safety and for their political
power. The power of England has been the main
condition of her past industrial success; her trade has
been extensive and her merchants rich, because she
has been able to make her political and military force
felt, and to exercise her influence among all the
nations of the world. If she has dominated the commerce
of the world, it is because her unconquered
navy has dominated, and continues to dominate, all
the avenues of commerce. This is the currently
accepted argument.</p>
<p>The fact that Germany has of late come to the
front as an industrial nation, making giant strides in
general prosperity and well-being, is deemed also to
be the result of <i>her</i> military successes and the increasing
political power which she is coming to exercise in
Continental Europe. These things, alike in England
and in Germany, are accepted as the axioms of the
problem, as the citations given in the next chapter
sufficiently prove. I am not aware that a single
authority of note, at least in the world of workaday
politics, has ever challenged or disputed them. Even
those who have occupied prominent positions in the
propaganda of peace are at one with the veriest fire-eaters
on this point. Mr. W.T. Stead was one of the
leaders of the big navy party in England. Mr. Frederic
Harrison, who all his life had been known as the
philosopher protagonist of peace, declared recently
that, if England allowed Germany to get ahead of her
in the race for armaments, "famine, social anarchy,
incalculable chaos in the industrial and financial
world, would be the inevitable result. Britain may
live on ... but before she began to live freely again
she would have to lose half her population, which she
could not feed, and all her overseas Empire, which
she could not defend.... How idle are fine words
about retrenchment, peace, and brotherhood, whilst
we lie open to the risk of unutterable ruin, to a deadly
fight for national existence, to war in its most destructive
and cruel form." On the other side we have
friendly critics of England, like Professor von Schulze-Gaevernitz,
writing: "We want our [<i>i.e.</i> Germany's]
navy in order to confine the commercial rivalry of
England within innocuous limits, and to deter the
sober sense of the English people from the extremely
threatening thought of attack upon us.... The
German navy is a condition of our bare existence
and independence, like the daily bread on which we
depend not only for ourselves, but for our children."</p>
<p>Confronted by a situation of this sort, one is bound
to feel that the ordinary argument of the pacifist
entirely breaks down; and it breaks down for a very
simple reason. He himself accepts the premise which
has just been indicated—viz., that the victorious
party in the struggle for political predominance gains
some material advantage over the party which is
conquered. The proposition even to the pacifist
seems so self-evident that he makes no effort to combat
it. He pleads his case otherwise. "It cannot be
denied, of course," says one peace advocate, "that
the thief <i>does</i> secure some material advantage by his
theft. What we plead is that if the two parties were
to devote to honest labor the time and energy devoted
to preying upon each other, the permanent
gain would more than offset the occasional booty."</p>
<p>Some pacifists go further, and take the ground that
there is a conflict between the natural law and the
moral law, and that we must choose the moral even
to our hurt. Thus Mr. Edward Grubb writes:</p>
<blockquote><p>Self-preservation is not the final law for nations any
more than for individuals.... The progress of humanity
may demand the extinction (in this world) of the
individual, and it may demand also the example and the
inspiration of a martyr nation. So long as the Divine
providence has need of us, Christian faith requires that
we shall trust for our safety to the unseen but real forces
of right dealing, truthfulness, and love; but, should the
will of God demand it, we must be prepared, as Jeremiah
taught his nation long ago, to give up even our national
life for furthering those great ends "to which the whole
creation moves."</p>
<p>This may be "fanaticism," but, if so, it is the fanaticism
of Christ and of the prophets, and we are willing to
take our places along with them.<a id="FNanchor_1_1"/><a href="#Footnote_1_1">[1]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>The foregoing is really the keynote of much
pacifist propaganda. In our own day, Count Tolstoi
has even expressed anger at the suggestion that any
reaction against militarism, on other than moral
grounds, can be efficacious.</p>
<p>The peace advocate pleads for "altruism" in international
relationships, and in so doing admits that
successful war may be to the interest, though the
immoral interest, of the victorious party. That is
why the "inhumanity" of war bulks so largely in his
propaganda, and why he dwells so much upon its
horrors and cruelties.</p>
<p>It thus results that the workaday world and those
engaged in the rough and tumble of practical politics
have come to look upon the peace ideal as a counsel
of perfection, which may one day be attained when
human nature, as the common phrase is, has been
improved out of existence, but not while human
nature remains what it is. While it remains possible
to seize a tangible advantage by a man's strong right
arm the advantage will be seized, and woe betide the
man who cannot defend himself.</p>
<p>Nor is this philosophy of force either as conscienceless,
as brutal, or as ruthless as its common statement
would make it appear. We know that in the world
as it exists to-day, in spheres other than those of international
rivalry, the race is to the strong, and the
weak get scant consideration. Industrialism and
commercialism are as full of cruelties as war itself—cruelties,
indeed, that are longer drawn out, more
refined, though less apparent, and, it may be, appealing
less to the common imagination than those of war.
With whatever reticence we may put the philosophy
into words, we all feel that conflict of interests in this
world is inevitable, and that what is an incident of our
daily lives should not be shirked as a condition of
those occasional titanic conflicts which mould the
history of the world.</p>
<p>The virile man doubts whether he ought to be
moved by the plea of the "inhumanity" of war. The
masculine mind accepts suffering, death itself, as a
risk which we are all prepared to run even in the most
unheroic forms of money-making; none of us refuses
to use the railway train because of the occasional
smash, to travel because of the occasional shipwreck,
and so on. Indeed, peaceful industry demands
a heavier toll even in blood than does a war, fact
which the casualty statistics in railroading, fishing,
mining and seamanship, eloquently attest; while
such peaceful industries as fishing and shipping are
the cause of as much brutality.<a id="FNanchor_2_2"/><a href="#Footnote_2_2">[2]</a> The peaceful administration
of the tropics takes as heavy a toll in the
health and lives of good men, and much of it, as
in the West of Africa, involves, unhappily, a moral
deterioration of human character as great as that
which can be put to the account of war.</p>
<p>Beside these peace sacrifices the "price of war" is
trivial, and it is felt that the trustees of a nation's
interests ought not to shrink from paying that price
should the efficient protection of those interests demand
it. If the common man is prepared, as we
know he is, to risk his life in a dozen dangerous trades
and professions for no object higher than that of
improving his position or increasing his income, why
should the statesman shrink from such sacrifices as
the average war demands, if thereby the great interests
which have been confided to him can be advanced?
If it be true, as even the pacifist admits
that it may be true, that the tangible material interests
of a nation can be advanced by warfare; if, in
other words, warfare can play some large part in the
protection of the interests of humanity, the rulers of
a courageous people are justified in disregarding the
suffering and the sacrifice that it may involve.</p>
<p>Of course, the pacifist falls back upon the moral
plea: we have no right to take by force. But here
again the common sense of ordinary humanity does
not follow the peace advocate. If the individual
manufacturer is entitled to use all the advantages
which great financial and industrial resources may
give him against a less powerful competitor, if he is
entitled, as under our present industrial scheme he is
entitled, to overcome competition by a costly and
perfected organization of manufacture, of advertisement,
of salesmanship, in a trade in which poorer men
gain their livelihood, why should not the nation be
entitled to overcome the rivalry of other nations by
utilizing the force of its public services? It is a
commonplace of industrial competition that the "big
man" takes advantage of <i>all</i> the weaknesses of the
small man—his narrow means, his ill-health even—to
undermine and to undersell. If it were true that
industrial competition were always merciful, and
national or political competition always cruel, the
plea of the peace man might be unanswerable; but
we know, as a matter of fact, that this is not the case,
and, returning to our starting-point, the common
man feels that he is obliged to accept the world as he
finds it, that struggle and warfare, in one form or
another, are among the conditions of life, conditions
which he did not make. Moreover he is not at all
sure that the warfare of arms is necessarily either the
hardest or the most cruel form of that struggle which
exists throughout the universe. In any case, he is
willing to take the risks, because he feels that military
predominance gives him a real and tangible advantage,
a material advantage translatable into terms
of general social well-being, by enlarged commercial
opportunities, wider markets, protection against the
aggression of commercial rivals, and so on. He faces
the risk of war in the same spirit as that in which a
sailor or a fisherman faces the risk of drowning, or a
miner that of the choke damp, or a doctor that of
a fatal disease, because he would rather take the supreme
risk than accept for himself and his dependents
a lower situation, a narrower and meaner existence,
with complete safety. He also asks whether the
lower path is altogether free from risks. If he knows
much of life he knows that in very many circumstances
the bolder way is the safer way.</p>
<p>That is why it is that the peace propaganda has
so signally failed, and why the public opinion of the
countries of Europe, far from restraining the tendency
of their Governments to increase armaments, is pushing
them into still greater expenditure. It is universally
assumed that national power means national
wealth, national advantage; that expanding territory
means increased opportunity for industry; that the
strong nation can guarantee opportunities for its
citizens that the weak nation cannot. The Englishman,
for instance, believes that his wealth is largely
the result of his political power, of his political
domination, mainly of his sea power; that Germany
with her expanding population must feel cramped;
that she must fight for elbow-room; and that if he
does not defend himself he will illustrate that universal
law which makes of every stomach a graveyard.
He has a natural preference for being the
diner rather than the dinner. As it is universally
admitted that wealth and prosperity and well-being
go with strength and power and national greatness,
he intends, so long as he is able, to maintain that
strength and power and greatness, and not to yield it
even in the name of altruism. And he will not yield
it, because should he do so it would be simply to
replace British power and greatness by the power
and greatness of some other nation, which he feels
sure would do no more for the well-being of civilization
as a whole than he is prepared to do. He is persuaded
that he can no more yield in the competition
of armaments, than as a business man or as a manufacturer
he could yield in commercial competition
to his rival; that he must fight out his salvation
under conditions as he finds them, since he did not
make them, and since he cannot change them.</p>
<p>Admitting his premises—and these premises are
the universally accepted axioms of international
politics the world over—who shall say that he is
wrong?</p>
<h3>CHAPTER II</h3>
<p>THE AXIOMS OF MODERN STATECRAFT</p>
<blockquote><p>Are the foregoing axioms unchallengeable?—Some typical statements
of them—German dreams of conquest—Mr. Frederic
Harrison on results of defeat of British arms and invasion of
England—Forty millions starving.</p></blockquote>
<p>Are the axioms set out in the last chapter unchallengeable?</p>
<p>Is it true that the wealth, prosperity and well-being
of a nation depend upon its military power, or
have necessarily anything whatever to do therewith?</p>
<p>Can one civilized nation gain moral or material
advantage by the military conquest of another?</p>
<p>Does conquered territory add to the wealth of the
conquering nation?</p>
<p>Is it possible for a nation to "own" the territory of
another in the way that a person or corporation
would "own" an estate?</p>
<p>Could Germany "take" English trade and Colonies
by military force?</p>
<p>Could she turn English Colonies into German
ones, and win an overseas empire by the sword, as
England won hers in the past?</p>
<p>Does a modern nation need to expand its political
boundaries in order to provide for increasing
population?</p>
<p>If England could conquer Germany to-morrow,
completely conquer her, reduce her nationality to so
much dust, would the ordinary British subject be the
better for it?</p>
<p>If Germany could conquer England, would any
ordinary German subject be the better for it?</p>
<p>The fact that all these questions have to be answered
in the negative, and that a negative answer
seems to outrage common sense, shows how much our
political axioms are in need of revision.</p>
<p>The literature on the subject leaves no doubt
whatever that I have correctly stated the premises of
the matter in the foregoing chapter. Those whose
special vocation is the philosophy of statecraft in
the international field, from Aristotle and Plato,
passing by Machiavelli and Clausewitz down to Mr.
Roosevelt and the German Emperor, have left us in
no doubt whatever on the point. The whole view has
been admirably summarized by two notable writers—Admiral
Mahan, on the Anglo-Saxon side, and
Baron Karl von Stengel (second German delegate to
the First Hague Conference) on the German. Admiral
Mahan says:</p>
<blockquote><p>The old predatory instinct that he should take who has
the power survives ... and moral force is not sufficient
to determine issues unless supported by physical. Governments
are corporations, and corporations have no
souls; governments, moreover, are trustees, and as such
must put first the lawful interests of their wards—their
own people.... More and more Germany needs the
assured importation of raw materials, and, where possible,
control of regions productive of such materials. More
and more she requires assured markets and security as to
the importation of food, since less and less comparatively
is produced within her own borders by her rapidly increasing
population. This all means security at sea....
Yet the supremacy of Great Britain in European seas
means a perpetually latent control of German commerce....
The world has long been accustomed to the idea of
a predominant naval power, coupling it with the name of
Great Britain, and it has been noted that such power,
when achieved, is commonly often associated with commercial
and industrial predominance, the struggle for
which is now in progress between Great Britain and
Germany. Such predominance forces a nation to seek
markets, and, where possible, to control them to its own
advantage by preponderant force, the ultimate expression
of which is possession.... From this flow two
results: the attempt to possess and the organization of
force by which to maintain possession already achieved....
This statement is simply a specific formulation of
the general necessity stated; it is an inevitable link in the
chain of logical sequences—industrial markets, control,
navy bases....<a id="FNanchor_3_3"/><a href="#Footnote_3_3">[3]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>But in order to show that this is no special view,
and that this philosophy does indeed represent the
general public opinion of Europe, the opinion of the
great mass which prompts the actions of Governments
and explains their respective policies, I take
the following from the current newspapers and
reviews ready to my hand:</p>
<blockquote><p>It is the prowess of our navy ... our dominant position
at sea ... which has built up the British Empire
and its commerce.—London <i>Times</i> leading article.</p>
<p>Because her commerce is infinitely vulnerable, and
because her people are dependent upon that commerce
for food and the wages with which to buy it....
Britain wants a powerful fleet, a perfect organization
behind the fleet, and an army of defence. Until they are
provided this country will exist under perpetual menace
from the growing fleet of German <i>Dreadnoughts</i>, which
have made the North Sea their parade-ground. All
security will disappear, and British commerce and industry,
when no man knows what the morrow will bring
forth, must rapidly decline, thus accentuating British
national degeneracy and decadence.—H.W. Wilson in
the <i>National Review</i>, May, 1909.</p>
<p>Sea-power is the last fact which stands between Germany
and the supreme position in international commerce.
At present Germany sends only some fifty
million pounds worth, or about a seventh, of her total
domestic produce to the markets of the world outside
Europe and the United States.... Does any man
who understands the subject think there is any power
in Germany, or, indeed, any power in the world, which
can prevent Germany, she having thus accomplished the
first stage of her work, from now closing with Great
Britain for her ultimate share of this 240 millions of
overseas trade? Here it is that we unmask the shadow
which looms like a real presence behind all the moves of
present-day diplomacy, and behind all the colossal armaments
that indicate the present preparations for a new
struggle for sea-power.—Mr. Benjamin Kidd in the
<i>Fortnightly Review</i>, April 1, 1910.</p>
<p>It is idle to talk of "limitation of armaments" unless
the nations of the earth will unanimously consent to lay
aside all selfish ambitions.... Nations, like individuals,
concern themselves chiefly with their own interests,
and when these clash with those of others,
quarrels are apt to follow. If the aggrieved party is the
weaker he usually goes to the wall, though "right" be
never so much on his side; and the stronger, whether he
be the aggressor or not, usually has his own way. In
international politics charity begins at home, and quite
properly; the duty of a statesman is to think first of the
interests of his own country.—<i>United Service Magazine</i>,
May, 1909.</p>
<p>Why should Germany attack Britain? Because Germany
and Britain are commercial and political rivals;
because Germany covets the trade, the colonies, and the
Empire which Britain now possesses.—Robert Blatchford,
"Germany and England," p. 4.</p>
<p>Great Britain, with her present population, exists by
virtue of her foreign trade and her control of the carrying
trade of the world; defeat in war would mean the transference
of both to other hands and consequent starvation
for a large percentage of the wage-earners.—T.G.
Martin in the London <i>World</i>.</p>
<p>We offer an enormously rich prize if we are not able to
defend out shores; we may be perfectly certain that the
prize which we offer will go into the mouth of somebody
powerful enough to overcome our resistance and to
swallow a considerable portion of us up.—The Speaker
of the House of Commons in a speech at Greystoke, reported
by the London <i>Times</i>.</p>
<p>What is good for the beehive is good for the bee.
Whatever brings rich lands, new ports, or wealthy industrial
areas to a State enriches its treasury, and therefore
the nation at large, and therefore the individual.—Mr.
Douglas Owen in a letter to the <i>Economist</i>, May 28, 1910.</p>
<p>Do not forget that in war there is no such thing as international
law, and that undefended wealth will be seized
wherever it is exposed, whether through the broken pane
of a jeweller's window or owing to the obsession of a
humanitarian Celt.—London <i>Referee</i>, November 14,
1909.</p>
<p>We appear to have forgotten the fundamental truth—confirmed
by all history—that the warlike races inherit
the earth, and that Nature decrees the survival of the
fittest in the never-ending struggle for existence....
Our yearning for disarmament, our respect for the tender
plant of Non-conformist conscience, and the parrot-like
repetition of the misleading formula that the "greatest
of all British interests is peace" ... must inevitably
give to any people who covet our wealth and our possessions
... the ambition to strike a swift and deadly
blow at the heart of the Empire—undefended London.—<i>Blackwood's
Magazine</i>, May, 1909.</p></blockquote>
<p>These are taken from English sources, but there is
not a straw to choose between them and other
European opinion on the subject.</p>
<p>Admiral Mahan and the other Anglo-Saxons of his
school have their counterpart in every European
country, but more especially in Germany. Even so
"Liberal" a statesman as Baron Karl von Stengel,
the German delegate to the First Hague Peace
Conference, lays it down in his book that—</p>
<blockquote><p>Every great Power must employ its efforts towards
exercising the largest influence possible, not only in
European but in world politics, and this mainly because
economic power depends in the last resort on political
power, and because the largest participation possible
in the trade of the world is a vital question for every
nation.</p></blockquote>
<p>The writings of such classic authorities as Clausewitz
give full confirmation of this view, while it is the
resounding note of most popular German political
literature that deals with "Weltpolitik." Grand
Admiral von Koster, President of the Navy League,
writes:</p>
<blockquote><p>The steady increase of our population compels us to
devote special attention to the growth of our overseas
interests. Nothing but the strong fulfilment of our naval
programme can create for us that importance upon the
free-world-sea which it is incumbent upon us to demand.
The steady increase of our population compels us to set
ourselves new goals and to grow from a Continental into
a world power. Our mighty industry must aspire to new
overseas conquests. Our world trade—which has more
than doubled in twenty years, which has increased from
2500 million dollars to 4000 million dollars during the ten
years in which our naval programme was fixed, and 3000
million dollars of which is sea-borne commerce—only
can flourish if we continue honorably to bear the
burdens of our armaments on land and sea alike. Unless
our children are to accuse us of short-sightedness, it is
now our duty to secure our world power and position
among other nations. We can do that only under the
protection of a strong German fleet, a fleet which shall
guarantee us peace with honor for the distant future.</p></blockquote>
<p>One popular German writer sees the possibility of
"overthrowing the British Empire" and "wiping it
from the map of the world in less than twenty-four
hours." (I quote his actual words, and I have heard
a parallel utterance from the mouth of a serious
English public man.) The author in question, in
order to show how the thing could come about, deals
with the matter prophetically. Writing from the
standpoint of 1911,<a id="FNanchor_4_4"/><a href="#Footnote_4_4">[4]</a> he admits that—</p>
<blockquote><p>At the beginning of the twentieth century Great
Britain was a free, a rich, and a happy country, in which
every citizen, from the Prime Minister to the dock-laborer,
was proud to be a member of the world-ruling
nation. At the head of the State were men possessing
a general mandate to carry out their programme of
government, whose actions were subject to the criticism
of public opinion, represented by an independent Press.
Educated for centuries in self-government, a race had
grown up which seemed born to rule. The highest triumphs
attended England's skill in the art of government,
in her handling of subject peoples.... And this
immense Empire, which stretched from the Cape to
Cairo, over the southern half of Asia, over half of North
America and the fifth continent, could be wiped from the
map of the world in less than twenty-four hours! This
apparently inexplicable fact will be intelligible if we keep
in sight the circumstances which rendered possible the
building up of England's colonial power. The true basis
of her world supremacy was not her own strength, but the
maritime weakness of all the other European nations.
Their almost complete lack of naval preparations had
given the English a position of monopoly which was used
by them for the annexation of all those dominions which
seemed of value. Had it been in England's power to
keep the rest of the world as it was in the nineteenth
century, the British Empire might have continued for
an unlimited time. The awakening of the Continental
States to their national possibilities and to political
independence introduced quite new factors into Weltpolitik,
and it was only a question of time as to how long
England could maintain her position in the face of the
changed circumstances.</p></blockquote>
<p>And the writer tells how the trick was done,
thanks to a fog, efficient espionage, the bursting of
the English war balloon, and the success of the German
one in dropping shells at the correct tactical
moment on to the British ships in the North Sea:</p>
<blockquote><p>This war, which was decided by a naval battle lasting
a single hour, was of only three weeks' duration—hunger
forced England into peace. In her conditions Germany
showed a wise moderation. In addition to a war indemnity
in accordance with the wealth of the two conquered
States, she contented herself with the acquisition of the
African Colonies, with the exception of the southern
States, which had proclaimed their independence, and
these possessions were divided with the other two powers
of the Triple Alliance. Nevertheless, this war was the
end of England. A lost battle had sufficed to manifest
to the world at large the feet of clay on which the dreaded
Colossus had stood. In a night the British Empire had
crumbled altogether; the pillars which English diplomacy
had erected after years of labour had failed at the first
test.</p></blockquote>
<p>A glance at any average Pan-Germanist organ will
reveal immediately how very nearly the foregoing
corresponds to a somewhat prevalent type of political
aspiration in Germany. One Pan-Germanist writer
says:</p>
<blockquote><p>"The future of Germany demands the absorption of
Austria-Hungary, the Balkan States, and Turkey, with
the North Sea ports. Her realms will stretch towards the
east from Berlin to Bagdad, and to Antwerp on the
west."</p></blockquote>
<p>For the moment we are assured there is no immediate
intention of seizing the countries in question,
nor is Germany's hand actually ready yet to catch
Belgium and Holland within the net of the Federated
Empire.</p>
<p>"But," he says, "all these changes will happen
within our epoch," and he fixes the time when the
map of Europe will thus be rearranged as from
twenty to thirty years hence.</p>
<p>Germany, according to the writer, means to fight
while she has a penny left and a man to carry arms,
for she is, he says, "face to face with a crisis which is
more serious than even that of Jena."</p>
<p>And, recognizing the position, she is only waiting
for the moment she judges the right one to break in
pieces those of her neighbors who work against her.</p>
<p>France will be her first victim, and she will not
wait to be attacked. She is, indeed, preparing for the
moment when the allied Powers attempt to dictate
to her.</p>
<p>Germany, it would seem, has already decided to
annex the Grand Duchy of Luxemburg, and Belgium,
incidentally with, of course, Antwerp, and will add all
the northern provinces of France to her possessions,
so as to secure Boulogne and Calais.</p>
<p>All this is to come like a thunderbolt, and Russia,
Spain, and the rest of the Powers friendly to England
will not dare to move a finger to aid her. The possession
of the coasts of France and Belgium will dispose
of England's supremacy for ever.</p>
<p>In a book on South Africa entitled "Reisen Erlebnisse
und Beobachtungen," by Dr. F. Bachmar,
occurs the passage:</p>
<blockquote><p>"My second object in writing this book is that it may
happen to our children's children to possess that beautiful
and unhappy land of whose final absorption (<i>gewinnung</i>)
by our Anglo-Saxon cousins I have not the least
belief. It may be our lot to unite this land with the
German Fatherland, to be equally a blessing to Germany
and South Africa."</p></blockquote>
<p>The necessity for armament is put in other than
fictional form by so serious a writer as Dr. Gaevernitz,
Pro-Rector of the University of Freiburg. Dr.
Schulze-Gaevernitz is not unknown in England, nor
is he imbued with inimical feelings towards her.
But he takes the view that the commercial prosperity
of Germany depends upon her political domination.<a id="FNanchor_5_5"/><a href="#Footnote_5_5">[5]</a></p>
<p>After having described in an impressive way the
astonishing growth of Germany's trade and commerce,
and shown how dangerous a competitor Germany
has become for England, he returns to the old
question, and asks what might happen if England,
unable to keep down the inconvenient upstart by
economic means, should, at the eleventh hour, try to
knock him down. Quotations from the <i>National
Review</i>, the <i>Observer</i>, the <i>Outlook</i>, the <i>Saturday Review</i>,
etc., facilitate the professor's thesis that this
presumption is more than a mere abstract speculation.
Granted that they voice only the sentiments of a
small minority, they are, according to our author,
dangerous for Germany in this—that they point to a
feasible and consequently enticing solution. The old
peaceful Free Trade, he says, shows signs of senility.
A new and rising Imperialism is everywhere inclined
to throw the weapons of political warfare into the
arena of economic rivalry.</p>
<p>How deeply the danger is felt even by those who
sincerely desire peace and can in no sense be considered
Jingoes may be judged by the following from
the pen of Mr. Frederic Harrison. I make no apology
for giving the quotations at some length. In a letter
to the London <i>Times</i> he says:</p>
<blockquote><p>Whenever our Empire and maritime ascendancy are
challenged it will be by such an invasion in force as was
once designed by Philip and Parma, and again by
Napoleon. It is this certainty which compels me to
modify the anti-militarist policy which I have consistently
maintained for forty years past.... To me
now it is no question of loss of prestige—no question of
the shrinkage of the Empire; it is our existence as a
foremost European Power, and even as a thriving nation....
If ever our naval defence were broken through,
our Navy overwhelmed or even dispersed for a season,
and a military occupation of our arsenals, docks, and
capital were effected, the ruin would be such as modern
history cannot parallel. It would not be the Empire, but
Britain, that would be destroyed.... The occupation
by a foreign invader of our arsenals, docks, cities, and
capital would be to the Empire what the bursting of the
boilers would be to a <i>Dreadnought</i>. Capital would disappear
with the destruction of credit.... A catastrophe
so appalling cannot be left to chance, even if the
probabilities against its occurring were 50 to 1. But the
odds are not 50 to 1. No high authority ventures to
assert that a successful invasion of our country is absolutely
impossible if it were assisted by extraordinary
conditions. And a successful invasion would mean to us
the total collapse of our Empire, our trade, and, with
trade, the means of feeding forty millions in these islands.
If it is asked, "Why does invasion threaten more terrible
consequences to us than it does to our neighbors?" the
answer is that the British Empire is an anomalous
structure, without any real parallel in modern history,
except in the history of Portugal, Venice, and Holland,
and in ancient history Athens and Carthage. Our
Empire presents special conditions both for attack and
for destruction. And its destruction by an enemy seated
on the Thames would have consequences so awful to
contemplate that it cannot be left to be safeguarded by
one sole line of defence, however good, and for the present
hour however adequate.... For more than forty
years I have raised my voice against every form of aggression,
of Imperial expansion, and Continental militarism.
Few men have more earnestly protested against postponing
social reforms and the well-being of the people
to Imperial conquests and Asiatic and African adventures.
I do not go back on a word that I have uttered
thereon. But how hollow is all talk about industrial
reorganization until we have secured our country against
a catastrophe that would involve untold destitution and
misery on the people in the mass—which would paralyze
industry and raise food to famine prices, whilst closing
our factories and our yards!</p></blockquote>
<h3>CHAPTER III</h3>
<p>THE GREAT ILLUSION</p>
<blockquote><p>These views founded on a gross and dangerous misconception—What
a German victory could and could not accomplish—What
an English victory could and could not accomplish—The
optical illusion of conquest—There can be no transfer
of wealth—The prosperity of the little States in Europe—German
Three per Cents. at 82 and Belgian at 96—Russian
Three and a Half per Cents. at 81, Norwegian at 102—What
this really means—If Germany annexed Holland, would any
German benefit or any Hollander?—The "cash value" of
Alsace-Lorraine.</p></blockquote>
<p>I think it will be admitted that there is not much
chance of misunderstanding the general idea embodied
in the passage quoted at the end of the last
chapter. Mr. Harrison is especially definite. At the
risk of "damnable iteration" I would again recall the
fact that he is merely expressing one of the universally
accepted axioms of European politics, namely,
that a nation's financial and industrial stability, its
security in commercial activity—in short, its prosperity
and well being depend, upon its being able to
defend itself against the aggression of other nations,
who will, if they are able, be tempted to commit such
aggression because in so doing they will increase their
power, prosperity and well-being, at the cost of the
weaker and vanquished.</p>
<p>I have quoted, it is true, largely journalistic
authorities because I desired to indicate real public
opinion, not merely scholarly opinion. But Mr.
Harrison has the support of other scholars of all
sorts. Thus Mr. Spenser Wilkinson, Chichele Professor
of Military History at Oxford, and a deservedly
respected authority on the subject, confirms
in almost every point in his various writings the
opinions that I have quoted, and gives emphatic
confirmation to all that Mr. Frederic Harrison has
expressed. In his book, "Britain at Bay," Professor
Wilkinson says: "No one thought when in 1888 the
American observer, Captain Mahan, published his
volume on the influence of sea-power upon history,
that other nations beside the British read from that
book the lesson that victory at sea carried with it a
prosperity and influence and a greatness obtainable
by no other means."</p>
<p>Well, it is the object of these pages to show that
this all but universal idea, of which Mr. Harrison's
letter is a particularly vivid expression, is a gross and
desperately dangerous misconception, partaking at
times of the nature of an optical illusion, at times of
the nature of a superstition—a misconception not
only gross and universal, but so profoundly mischievous
as to misdirect an immense part of the
energies of mankind, and to misdirect them to such
degree that unless we liberate ourselves from this
superstition civilization itself will be threatened.</p>
<p>And one of the most extraordinary features of this
whole question is that the absolute demonstration of
the falsity of this idea, the complete exposure of the
illusion which gives it birth, is neither abstruse nor
difficult. This demonstration does not repose upon
any elaborately constructed theorem, but upon the
simple exposition of the political facts of Europe as
they exist to-day. These facts, which are incontrovertible,
and which I shall elaborate presently, may
be summed up in a few simple propositions stated
thus:</p>
<p>1. An extent of devastation, even approximating
to that which Mr. Harrison foreshadows as the result
of the conquest of Great Britain, could only be inflicted
by an invader as a means of punishment
costly to himself, or as the result of an unselfish and
expensive desire to inflict misery for the mere joy of
inflicting it. Since trade depends upon the existence
of natural wealth and a population capable of working
it, an invader cannot "utterly destroy it,"
except by destroying the population, which is not
practicable. If he could destroy the population he
would thereby destroy his own market, actual or
potential, which would be commercially suicidal.<a id="FNanchor_6_6"/><a href="#Footnote_6_6">[6]</a></p>
<p>2. If an invasion of Great Britain by Germany
did involve, as Mr. Harrison and those who think
with him say it would, the "total collapse of the
Empire, our trade, and the means of feeding forty
millions in these islands ... the disturbance of
capital and destruction of credit," German capital
would also be disturbed, because of the internationalization
and delicate interdependence of our credit-built
finance and industry, and German credit would
also collapse, and the only means of restoring it would
be for Germany to put an end to the chaos in England
by putting an end to the condition which had
produced it. Moreover, because of this delicate
interdependence of our credit-built finance, the confiscation
by an invader of private property, whether
stocks, shares, ships, mines, or anything more
valuable than jewellery or furniture—anything, in
short, which is bound up with the economic life of the
people—would so react upon the finance of the invader's
country as to make the damage to the invader
resulting from the confiscation exceed in value
the property confiscated. So that Germany's success
in conquest would be a demonstration of the complete
economic futility of conquest.</p>
<p>3. For allied reasons, in our day the exaction of
tribute from a conquered people has become an
economic impossibility; the exaction of a large indemnity
so costly directly and indirectly as to be an
extremely disadvantageous financial operation.</p>
<p>4. It is a physical and economic impossibility to
capture the external or carrying trade of another
nation by military conquest. Large navies are impotent
to create trade for the nations owning them,
and can do nothing to "confine the commercial
rivalry" of other nations. Nor can a conqueror
destroy the competition of a conquered nation by
annexation; his competitors would still compete with
him—<i>i.e.</i>, if Germany conquered Holland, German
merchants would still have to meet the competition
of Dutch merchants, and on keener terms than
originally, because the Dutch merchants would then
be within the German's customs lines; the notion
that the trade competition of rivals can be disposed
of by conquering those rivals being one of the illustrations
of the curious optical illusion which lies
behind the misconception dominating this subject.</p>
<p>5. The wealth, prosperity, and well-being of a
nation depend in no way upon its political power;
otherwise we should find the commercial prosperity
and social well-being of the smaller nations, which
exercise no political power, manifestly below that of
the great nations which control Europe, whereas
this is not the case. The populations of States like
Switzerland, Holland, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden,
are in every way as prosperous as the citizens of
States like Germany, Russia, Austria, and France.
The wealth <i>per capita</i> of the small nations is in many
cases in excess of that of the great nations. Not only
the question of the security of small States, which, it
might be urged, is due to treaties of neutrality, is
here involved, but the question of whether political
power can be turned in a positive sense to economic
advantage.</p>
<p>6. No other nation could gain any advantage by
the conquest of the British Colonies, and Great
Britain could not suffer material damage by their
loss, however much such loss would be regretted on
sentimental grounds, and as rendering less easy a
certain useful social co-operation between kindred
peoples. The use, indeed, of the word "loss" is misleading.
Great Britain does not "own" her Colonies.
They are, in fact, independent nations in alliance
with the Mother Country, to whom they are no
source of tribute or economic profit (except as foreign
nations are a source of profit), their economic relations
being settled, not by the Mother Country, but
by the Colonies. Economically, England would gain
by their formal separation, since she would be relieved
of the cost of their defence. Their "loss"
involving, therefore, no change in economic fact (beyond saving the Mother Country the cost of their
defence), could not involve the ruin of the Empire,
and the starvation of the Mother Country, as those
who commonly treat of such a contingency are apt
to aver. As England is not able to exact tribute or
economic advantage, it is inconceivable that any
other country, necessarily less experienced in colonial
management, would be able to succeed where England
had failed, especially in view of the past history
of the Spanish, Portuguese, French, and British
Colonial Empires. This history also demonstrates
that the position of British Crown Colonies, in the
respect which we are considering, is not sensibly
different from that of the self-governing ones. It is
<i>not</i> to be presumed, therefore, that any European
nation, realizing the facts, would attempt the desperately
expensive business of the conquest of
England for the purpose of making an experiment
which all colonial history shows to be doomed to
failure.</p>
<p>The foregoing propositions traverse sufficiently the
ground covered in the series of those typical statements
of policy, both English and German, from
which I have quoted. The simple statement of these
propositions, based as they are upon the self-evident
facts of present-day European politics, sufficiently
exposes the nature of those political axioms which I
have quoted. But as men even of the calibre of Mr.
Harrison normally disregard these self-evident facts,
it is necessary to elaborate them at somewhat greater
length.</p>
<p>For the purpose of presenting a due parallel to the
statement of policy embodied in the quotations made
from the London <i>Times</i> and Mr. Harrison and
others, I have divided the propositions which I desire
to demonstrate into seven clauses, but such a division
is quite arbitrary, and made only in order to bring
about the parallel in question. The whole seven can
be put into one, as follows: That as the only possible
policy in our day for a conqueror to pursue is to leave
the wealth of a territory in the complete possession
of the individuals inhabiting that territory, it is a
logical fallacy and an optical illusion to regard a
nation as increasing its wealth when it increases its
territory; because when a province or State is
annexed, the population, who are the real and only
owners of the wealth therein, are also annexed, and
the conqueror gets nothing. The facts of modern
history abundantly demonstrate this. When Germany
annexed Schleswig-Holstein and Alsatia not a
single ordinary German citizen was one <i>pfennig</i> the
richer. Although England "owns" Canada, the
English merchant is driven out of the Canadian
markets by the merchant of Switzerland, who does
not "own" Canada. Even where territory is not
formally annexed, the conqueror is unable to take
the wealth of a conquered territory, owing to the
delicate interdependence of the financial world (an
outcome of our credit and banking systems), which
makes the financial and industrial security of the
victor dependent upon financial and industrial security
in all considerable civilized centres; so that
widespread confiscation or destruction of trade and
commerce in a conquered territory would react disastrously
upon the conqueror. The conqueror is thus
reduced to economic impotence, which means that
political and military power is economically futile—that
is to say, can do nothing for the trade and
well-being of the individuals exercising such power.
Conversely, armies and navies cannot destroy the
trade of rivals, nor can they capture it. The great
nations of Europe do not destroy the trade of the
small nations for their own benefit, because they
cannot; and the Dutch citizen, whose Government
possesses no military power, is just as well off as the
German citizen, whose Government possesses an
army of two million men, and a great deal better off
than the Russian, whose Government possesses an
army of something like four million. Thus, as a
rough-and-ready though incomplete indication of the
relative wealth and security of the respective States,
the Three per Cents. of powerless Belgium are quoted
at 96, and the Three per Cents. of powerful Germany
at 82; the Three and a Half per Cents. of the Russian
Empire, with its hundred and twenty million souls
and its four million army, are quoted at 81, while the
Three and a Half per Cents. of Norway, which has
not an army at all (or any that need be considered
in this discussion), are quoted at 102. All of which
carries with it the paradox that the more a nation's
wealth is militarily protected the less secure does it
become.<a id="FNanchor_7_7"/><a href="#Footnote_7_7">[7]</a></p>
<p>The late Lord Salisbury, speaking to a delegation
of business men, made this notable observation:
The conduct of men of affairs acting individually in
their business capacity differs radically in its principles
and application from the conduct of the same
men when they act collectively in political affairs.
And one of the most astonishing things in politics is
the little trouble business men take to bring their
political creed into keeping with their daily behavior;
how little, indeed, they realize the political implication
of their daily work. It is a case, indeed, of the
forest and the trees.</p>
<p>But for some such phenomenon we certainly should
not see the contradiction between the daily practice
of the business world and the prevailing political
philosophy, which the security of property in, and
the high prosperity of, the smaller States involves.
We are told by all the political experts that great
navies and great armies are necessary to protect our
wealth against the aggression of powerful neighbors,
whose cupidity and voracity can be controlled by
force alone; that treaties avail nothing, and that in
international politics might makes right, that military
and commercial security are identical, that
armaments are justified by the necessity of commercial
security; that our navy is an "insurance," and
that a country without military power with which
their diplomats can "bargain" in the Council of
Europe is at a hopeless disadvantage economically.
Yet when the investor, studying the question in its
purely financial and material aspect, has to decide
between the great States, with all their imposing
paraphernalia of colossal armies and fabulously costly
navies, and the little States, possessing relatively no
military power whatever, he plumps solidly, and
with what is in the circumstances a tremendous
difference, in favor of the small and helpless. For a
difference of twenty points, which we find as between
Norwegian and Russian, and fourteen as between
Belgian and German securities, is the difference
between a safe and a speculative one—the difference
between an American railroad bond in time of profound
security and in time of widespread panic. And
what is true of the Government funds is true, in an
only slightly less degree, of the industrial securities
in the national comparison just drawn.</p>
<p>Is it a sort of altruism or quixotism which thus
impels the capitalists of Europe to conclude that the
public funds and investments of powerless Holland
and Sweden (any day at the mercy of their big
neighbors) are 10 to 20 per cent. safer than those of
the greatest Power of Continental Europe. The question
is, of course, absurd. The only consideration of
the financier is profit and security, and he has decided
that the funds of the undefended nation are
more secure than the funds of one defended by
colossal armaments. How does he arrive at this
decision, unless it be through his knowledge as a
financier, which, of course, he exercises without
reference to the political implication of his decision,
that modern wealth requires no defence, because it
cannot be confiscated?</p>
<p>If Mr. Harrison is right; if, as he implies, a nation's
commerce, its very industrial existence, would disappear
if it allowed neighbors who envied it that
commerce to become its superiors in armaments, and
to exercise political weight in the world, how does he
explain the fact that the great Powers of the Continent
are flanked by little nations far weaker than
themselves having nearly always a commercial development
equal to, and in most cases greater than
theirs? If the common doctrines be true, the financiers
would not invest a dollar in the territories of the
undefended nations, and yet, far from that being the
case, they consider that a Swiss or a Dutch investment
is more secure than a German one; that industrial
undertakings in a country like Switzerland
defended by an army of a few thousand men, are
preferable in point of security to enterprises backed
by two millions of the most perfectly trained soldiers
in the world. The attitude of European finance in
this matter is the absolute condemnation of the view
commonly taken by the statesman. If a country's
trade were really at the mercy of the first successful
invader; if armies and navies were really necessary
for the protection and promotion of trade, the small
countries would be in a hopelessly inferior position,
and could only exist on the sufferance of what we are
told are unscrupulous aggressors. And yet Norway
has relatively to population a greater carrying trade
than Great Britain,<a id="FNanchor_8_8"/><a href="#Footnote_8_8">[8]</a> and Dutch, Swiss, and Belgian
merchants compete in all the markets of the world
successfully with those of Germany and France.</p>
<p>The prosperity of the small States is thus a fact
which proves a good deal more than that wealth can
be secure without armaments. We have seen that
the exponents of the orthodox statecraft—notably
such authorities as Admiral Mahan—plead that armaments
are a necessary part of the industrial
struggle, that they are used as a means of exacting
economic advantage for a nation which would be
impossible without them. "The logical sequence,"
we are told, is "markets, control, navy, bases."
The nation without political and military power is,
we are assured, at a hopeless disadvantage economically
and industrially.<a id="FNanchor_9_9"/><a href="#Footnote_9_9">[9]</a></p>
<p>Well, the relative economic situation of the small
States gives the lie to this profound philosophy. It
is seen to be just learned nonsense when we realize
that all the might of Russia or Germany cannot secure
for the individual citizen better general economic
conditions than those prevalent in the little States.
The citizens of Switzerland, Belgium, or Holland,
countries without "control," or navy, or bases, or
"weight in the councils of Europe," or the "prestige
of a great Power," are just as well off as Germans,
and a great deal better off than Austrians or Russians.</p>
<p>Thus, even if it could be argued that the security
of the small States is due to the various treaties
guaranteeing their neutrality, it cannot be argued
that those treaties give them the political power and
"control" and "weight in the councils of the nations"
which Admiral Mahan and the other exponents of
the orthodox statecraft assure us are such necessary
factors in national prosperity.</p>
<p>I want, with all possible emphasis, to indicate the
limits of the argument that I am trying to enforce.
That argument is not that the facts just cited show
armaments or the absence of them to be the sole or
even the determining factor in national wealth. It
does show that the security of wealth is due to other
things than armaments; that absence of political and
military power is on the one hand no obstacle to, and
on the other hand no guarantee of, prosperity; that
the mere size of the administrative area has no
relation to the wealth of those inhabiting it.</p>
<p>Those who argue that the security of the small
States is due to the international treaties protecting
their neutrality are precisely those who argue that
treaty rights are things that can never give security!
Thus one British military writer says:</p>
<blockquote><p>The principle practically acted on by statesmen,
though, of course, not openly admitted, is that frankly
enunciated by Machiavelli: "A prudent ruler ought not
to keep faith when by so doing it would be against his
interests, and when the reasons which made him bind
himself no longer exist." Prince Bismarck said practically
the same thing, only not quite so nakedly. The
European waste-paper basket is the place to which all
treaties eventually find their way, and a thing which can
any day be placed in a waste-paper basket is a poor
thing on which to hang our national safety. Yet there
are plenty of people in this country who quote treaties
to us as if we could depend on their never being torn up.
Very plausible and very dangerous people they are—idealists
too good and innocent for a hard, cruel world,
where force is the chief law. Yet there are some such
innocent people in Parliament even at present. It is to
be hoped that we shall see none of them there in future.<a id="FNanchor_10_10"/><a href="#Footnote_10_10">[10]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Major Murray is right to this extent: the militarist
view, the view of those who "believe in war," and
defend it even on moral grounds as a thing without
which men would be "sordid," supports this philosophy
of force, which flourishes in the atmosphere
which the militarist regimen engenders.</p>
<p>But the militarist view involves a serious dilemma.
If the security of a nation's wealth can only be
assured by force, and treaty rights are mere waste
paper, how can we explain the evident security of the
wealth of States possessing relatively no force? By
the mutual jealousies of those guaranteeing their
neutrality? Then that mutual jealousy could equally
well guarantee the security of any one of the larger
States against the rest. Another Englishman, Mr.
Farrer, has put the case thus:</p>
<blockquote><p>If that recent agreement between England, Germany,
France, Denmark, and Holland can so effectively relieve
Denmark and Holland from the fear of invasion that
Denmark can seriously consider the actual abolition of
her army and navy, it seems only one further step to go,
for all the Powers collectively, great and small, to guarantee
the territorial independence of each one of them
severally.</p></blockquote>
<p>In either case, the plea of the militarist stands
condemned: national safety can be secured by means
other than military force.</p>
<p>But the real truth involves a distinction which
is essential to the right understanding of this phenomenon:
the political security of the small States is
<i>not</i> assured; no man would take heavy odds on Holland
being able to maintain complete political independence
if Germany cared seriously to threaten it.
But Holland's economic security <i>is</i> assured. Every
financier in Europe knows that if Germany conquered
Holland or Belgium to-morrow, she would have to
leave their wealth untouched; there could be no
confiscation. And that is why the stocks of the lesser
States, not in reality threatened by confiscation, yet
relieved in part at least of the charge of armaments,
stand fifteen to twenty points higher than those of
the military States. Belgium, politically, might disappear
to-morrow; her wealth would remain practically
unchanged.</p>
<p>Yet, by one of those curious contradictions we are
frequently meeting in the development of ideas,
while a fact like this is at least subconsciously recognized
by those whom it concerns, the necessary
corollary of it—the positive form of the merely negative
truth that a community's wealth cannot be
stolen—is not recognized. We admit that a people's
wealth must remain unaffected by conquest, and yet
we are quite prepared to urge that we can enrich
ourselves by conquering them! But if we must leave
their wealth alone, how can we take it?</p>
<p>I do not speak merely of "loot." It is evident,
even on cursory examination, that no real advantage
of any kind is achieved for the mass of one people by
the conquest of another. Yet that end is set up in
European politics as desirable beyond all others.
Here, for instance, are the Pan-Germanists of Germany.
This party has set before itself the object of
grouping into one great Power all the peoples of the
Germanic race or language in Europe. Were this
aim achieved, Germany would become the dominating
Power of the Continent, and might become the
dominating Power of the world. And according to
the commonly accepted view, such an achievement
would, from the point of view of Germany, be worth
any sacrifice that Germans could make. It would be
an object so great, so desirable, that German citizens
should not hesitate for an instant to give everything,
life itself, in its accomplishment. Very good. Let us
assume that at the cost of great sacrifice, the greatest
sacrifice which it is possible to imagine a modern
civilized nation making, this has been accomplished,
and that Belgium and Holland and Germany,
Switzerland and Austria, have all become part of the
great German hegemony: <i>is there one ordinary German
citizen who would be able to say that his well-being
had been increased by such a change</i>? Germany would
then "own" Holland. <i>But would a single German
citizen be the richer for the ownership?</i> The Hollander,
from having been the citizen of a small and insignificant
State, would become the citizen of a very great
one. <i>Would the individual Hollander be any the richer
or any the better?</i> We know that, as a matter of fact,
neither the German nor the Hollander would be one
whit the better; and we know also, as a matter of fact,
that in all probability they would be a great deal the
worse. We may, indeed, say that the Hollander
would be certainly the worse, in that he would have
exchanged the relatively light taxation and light
military service of Holland for the much heavier
taxation and the much longer military service of the
"great" German Empire.</p>
<p>The following, which appeared in the London <i>Daily
Mail</i> in reply to an article in that paper, throws some
further light on the points elaborated in this chapter.
The <i>Daily Mail</i> critic had placed Alsace-Lorraine as
an asset in the German conquest worth $330,000,000
"cash value," and added: "If Alsace-Lorraine had
remained French, it would have yielded, at the
present rate of French taxation, a revenue of $40,000,000
a year to the State. That revenue is lost to
France, and is placed at the disposal of Germany."</p>
<p>To which I replied:</p>
<blockquote><p>Thus, if we take the interest of the "cash value" at the
present price of money in Germany, Alsace-Lorraine
should be worth to the Germans about $15,000,000 a
year. If we take the other figure, $40,000,000. Suppose
we split the difference, and take, say, 20. Now, if the
Germans are enriched by 20 millions a year—if Alsace-Lorraine
is really worth that income to the German
people—how much should the English people draw from
their "possessions"? On the basis of population, somewhere
in the region of $5,000,000,000; on the basis of
area, still more—enough not only to pay all English taxes,
wipe out the National Debt, support the army and navy,
but give every family in the land a fat income into the
bargain. There is evidently something wrong.</p>
<p>Does not my critic really see that this whole notion of
national possessions benefiting the individual is founded
on mystification, upon an illusion? Germany conquered
France and annexed Alsace-Lorraine. The "Germans"
consequently "own" it, and enrich themselves with this
newly acquired wealth. That is my critic's view, as it is
the view of most European statesmen; and it is all false.
Alsace-Lorraine is owned by its inhabitants, and nobody
else; and Germany, with all her ruthlessness, has not
been able to dispossess them, as is proved by the fact that
the matricular contribution (<i>matrikularbeitrag</i>) of the
newly acquired State to the Imperial treasury (which
incidentally is neither 15 millions nor 40, but just over
five) is fixed on exactly the same scale as that of the other
States of the Empire. Prussia, the conqueror, pays <i>per
capita</i> just as much as and no less than Alsace, the conquered,
who, if she were not paying this $5,600,000 to
Germany, would be paying it—or, according to my critic,
a much larger sum—to France; and if Germany did not
"own" Alsace-Lorraine, she would be relieved of charges
that amount not to five but many more millions. The
change of "ownership" does not therefore of itself change
the money position (which is what we are now discussing)
of either owner or owned.</p>
<p>In examining, in the last article on this matter, my
critic's balance-sheet, I remarked that were his figures as
complete as they are absurdly incomplete and misleading,
I should still have been unimpressed. We all know
that very marvellous results are possible with figures;
but one can generally find some simple fact which puts
them to the supreme test without undue mathematics.
I do not know whether it has ever happened to my critic,
as it has happened to me, while watching the gambling
in the casino of a Continental watering resort, to have a
financial genius present weird columns of figures, which
demonstrate conclusively, irrefragably, that by the system
which they embody one can break the bank and win
a million. I have never examined these figures, and never
shall, for this reason: the genius in question is prepared to
sell his wonderful secret for twenty francs. Now, in the
face of that fact I am not interested in his figures. If
they were worth examination they would not be for
sale.</p>
<p>And so in this matter there are certain test facts which
upset the adroitest statistical legerdemain. Though,
really, the fallacy which regards an addition of territory
as an addition of wealth to the "owning" nation is a very
much simpler matter than the fallacies lying behind
gambling systems, which are bound up with the laws of
chance and the law of averages and much else that
philosophers will quarrel about till the end of time. It
requires an exceptional mathematical brain to refute
those fallacies, whereas the one we are dealing with is due
simply to the difficulty experienced by most of us in
carrying in our heads two facts at the same time. It is so
much easier to seize on one fact and forget the other.
Thus we realize that when Germany has conquered
Alsace-Lorraine she has "captured" a province worth,
"cash value," in my critic's phrase, $330,000,000. What
we overlook is that Germany has also captured the
people who own the property and who continue to own
it. We have multiplied by <i>x</i>, it is true, but we have overlooked
the fact that we have had to divide by <i>x</i>, and that
the result is consequently, so far as the individual is
concerned, exactly what it was before. My critic remembered
the multiplication all right, but he forgot the
division. Let us apply the test fact. If a great country
benefits every time it annexes a province, and her people
are the richer for the widened territory, the small nations
ought to be immeasurably poorer than the great, instead
of which, by every test which you like to apply—public
credit, amounts in savings banks, standard of living,
social progress, general well-being—citizens of small
States are, other things being equal, as well off as, or
better off than, the citizens of great States. The citizens
of countries like Holland, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden,
Norway are, by every possible test, just as well off as
the citizens of countries like Germany, Austria, or
Russia. These are the facts which are so much more
potent than any theory. If it is true that a country
benefits by the acquisition of territory, and widened
territory means general well-being, why do the facts so
eternally deny it? There is something wrong with the
theory.</p>
<p>In every civilized State, revenues which are drawn
from a territory are expended on that territory, and
there is no process known to modern government by
which wealth may first be drawn from a territory into the
treasury and then be redistributed with a profit to the
individuals who have contributed it, or to others. It
would be just as reasonable to say that the citizens of
London are richer than the citizens of Birmingham
because London has a richer treasury; or that Londoners
would become richer if the London County Council were
to annex the county of Hertford; as to say that people's
wealth varies according to the size of the administrative
area which they inhabit. The whole thing is, as I have
called it, an optical illusion, due to the hypnotism of an
obsolete terminology. Just as poverty may be greater
in the large city than in the small one, and taxation
heavier, so the citizens of a great State may be poorer
than the citizens of a small one, as they very often are.
Modern government is mainly, and tends to become
entirely, a matter of administration. A mere jugglery
with the administrative entities, the absorption of small
States into large ones, or the breaking up of large States
into small, is not of itself going to affect the matter one
way or the other.</p></blockquote>
<h3>CHAPTER IV</h3>
<p>THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF CONFISCATION</p>
<blockquote><p>Our present terminology of international politics an historical
survival—Wherein modern conditions differ from ancient—The
profound change effected by Division of Labor—The delicate
interdependence of international finance—Attila and the Kaiser—What
would happen if a German invader looted the Bank
of England—German trade dependent upon English credit—Confiscation
of an enemy's property an economic impossibility
under modern conditions—Intangibility of a community's
wealth.</p></blockquote>
<p>During the Victorian Jubilee procession an English
beggar was heard to say:</p>
<blockquote><p>I own Australia, Canada, New Zealand, India,
Burmah, and the Islands of the Far Pacific; and I am
starving for want of a crust of bread. I am a citizen
of the greatest Power of the modern world, and all
people should bow to my greatness. And yesterday I
cringed for alms to a negro savage, who repulsed me
with disgust.</p></blockquote>
<p>What is the meaning of this?</p>
<p>The meaning is that, as very frequently happens
in the history of ideas, our terminology is a survival
of conditions no longer existing, and our mental conceptions
follow at the tail of our vocabulary. International
politics are still dominated by terms applicable
to conditions which the processes of modern life
have altogether abolished.</p>
<p>In the Roman times—indeed, in all the ancient
world—it may have been true that the conquest of a
territory meant a tangible advantage to the conqueror;
it meant the exploitation of the conquered
territory by the conquering State itself, to the
advantage of that State and its citizens. It not
infrequently meant the enslavement of the conquered
people and the acquisition of wealth in the form of
slaves as a direct result of the conquering war. In
mediæval times a war of conquest meant at least
immediate tangible booty in the shape of movable
property, actual gold and silver, land parcelled out
among the chiefs of the conquering nation, as it was
at the Norman Conquest, and so forth.</p>
<p>At a later period conquest at least involved an
advantage to the reigning house of the conquering
nation, and it was mainly the squabbles of rival
sovereigns for prestige and power which produced
the wars of many centuries.</p>
<p>At a still later period, civilization, as a whole—not
necessarily the conquering nation—gained (sometimes)
by the conquest of savage peoples, in that
order was substituted for disorder. In the period of
the colonization of newly-discovered land, the preemption
of territory by one particular nation secured
an advantage for the citizens of that nation, in that
its overflowing population found homes in conditions
preferable socially, or politically, to the conditions
imposed by alien nations. <i>But none of these considerations
applies to the problem with which we are dealing.</i>
We are concerned with the case of fully civilized rival
nations in fully occupied territory or with civilizations
so firmly set that conquest could not sensibly
modify their character, and the fact of conquering
such territory gives to the conqueror no material
advantage which he could not have had without
conquest. And in these conditions—the realities of
the political world as we find it to-day—"domination,"
or "predominance of armament," or the
"command of the sea," can do nothing for commerce
and industry or general well-being: England may
build fifty <i>Dreadnoughts</i> and not sell so much as a
penknife the more in consequence. She might conquer
Germany to-morrow, and she would find that
she could not make a single Englishman a shilling's
worth the richer in consequence, the war indemnity
notwithstanding.</p>
<p>How have conditions so changed that terms which
were applicable to the ancient world—in one sense at
least to the mediæval world, and in another sense still
to the world of that political renaissance which gave
to Great Britain its Empire—are no longer applicable
in <i>any</i> sense to the conditions of the world as we find
them to-day? How has it become impossible for one
nation to take by conquest the wealth of another for
the benefit of the people of the conqueror? How is it
that we are confronted by the absurdity (which the
facts of the British Empire go to prove) of the conquering
people being able to exact from conquered
territory rather less than more advantage than it was
able to do before the conquest took place?</p>
<p>I am not at this stage going to pass in review all
the factors that have contributed to this change,
because it will suffice for the demonstration upon
which I am now engaged to call attention to a phenomenon
which is the outcome of all those factors
and which is undeniable, and that is, the financial
interdependence of the modern world. But I will
forecast here what belongs more properly to a later
stage of this work, and will give just a hint of the
forces which are the result mainly of one great fact—the
division of labor intensified by facility of communication.</p>
<p>When the division of labor was so little developed
that every homestead produced all that it needed, it
mattered nothing if part of the community was cut
off from the world for weeks and months at a time.
All the neighbors of a village or homestead might be
slain or harassed, and no inconvenience resulted.
But if to-day an English county is by a general railroad
strike cut off for so much as forty-eight hours
from the rest of the economic organism, we know that
whole sections of its population are threatened with
famine. If in the time of the Danes, England could
by some magic have killed all foreigners, she would
presumably have been the better off. If she could do
the same thing to-day, half her population would
starve to death. If on one side of the frontier a
community is, say, wheat-producing, and on the
other coal-producing, each is dependent for its very
existence, on the fact of the other being able to carry
on its labor. The miner cannot in a week set to and
grow a crop of wheat; the farmer must wait for his
wheat to grow, and must meantime feed his family
and dependents. The exchange involved here must
go on, and each party have fair expectation that he
will in due course be able to reap the fruits of his
labor, or both must starve; and that exchange, that
expectation, is merely the expression in its simplest
form of commerce and credit; and the interdependence
here indicated has, by the countless developments
of rapid communication, reached such a
condition of complexity that the interference with
any given operation affects not merely the parties
directly involved, but numberless others having at
first sight no connection therewith.</p>
<p>The vital interdependence here indicated, cutting
athwart frontiers, is largely the work of the last forty
years; and it has, during that time, so developed as
to have set up a financial interdependence of the
capitals of the world, so complex that disturbance in
New York involves financial and commercial disturbance
in London, and, if sufficiently grave, compels
financiers of London to co-operate with those of
New York to put an end to the crisis, not as a matter
of altruism, but as a matter of commercial self-protection.
The complexity of modern finance makes
New York dependent on London, London upon
Paris, Paris upon Berlin, to a greater degree than has
ever yet been the case in history. This interdependence
is the result of the daily use of those contrivances
of civilization which date from yesterday—the
rapid post, the instantaneous dissemination of
financial and commercial information by means of
telegraphy, and generally the incredible increase in
the rapidity of communication which has put the
half-dozen chief capitals of Christendom in closer
contact financially, and has rendered them more
dependent the one upon the other than were the
chief cities of Great Britain less than a hundred
years ago.</p>
<p>A well-known French authority, writing recently
in a financial publication, makes this reflection:</p>
<blockquote><p>The very rapid development of industry has given rise
to the active intervention therein of finance, which has
become its <i>nervus rerum</i>, and has come to play a dominating
rôle. Under the influence of finance, industry is
beginning to lose its exclusively national character to
take on a character more and more international. The
animosity of rival nationalities seems to be in process of
attenuation as the result of this increasing international
solidarity. This solidarity was manifested in a striking
fashion in the last industrial and monetary crisis. This
crisis, which appeared in its most serious form in the
United States and Germany, far from being any profit to
rival nations, has been injurious to them. The nations
competing with America and Germany, such as England
and France, have suffered only less than the countries
directly affected. It must not be forgotten that, quite
apart from the financial interests involved, directly or
indirectly, in the industry of other countries, every producing
country is at one and the same time, as well as
being a competitor and a rival, a client and a market.
Financial and commercial solidarity is increasing every
day at the expense of commercial and industrial competition.
This was certainly one of the principal causes which
a year or two ago prevented the outbreak of war between
Germany and France <i>à propos</i> of Morocco, and which led
to the understanding of Algeciras. There can be no
doubt, for those who have studied the question, that the
influence of this international economic solidarity is
increasing despite ourselves. It has not resulted from
conscious action on the part of any of us, and it certainly
cannot be arrested by any conscious action on our part.<a id="FNanchor_11_11"/><a href="#Footnote_11_11">[11]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>A fiery patriot sent to a London paper the following
letter:</p>
<blockquote><p>When the German army is looting the cellars of the
Bank of England, and carrying off the foundations of our
whole national fortune, perhaps the twaddlers who are
now screaming about the wastefulness of building four
more <i>Dreadnoughts</i> will understand why sane men are
regarding this opposition as treasonable nonsense.</p></blockquote>
<p>What would be the result of such an action on the
part of a German army in London? The first effect,
of course, would be that, as the Bank of England is
the banker of all other banks, there would be a run
on every bank in England, and all would suspend
payment. But London being the clearing-house of
the world, bills drawn thereon but held by foreigners
would not be met; they would be valueless; the
loanable value of money in other centres would be
enormously raised, and instruments of credit enormously
depreciated; prices of all kinds of stocks
would fall, and holders would be threatened by ruin
and insolvency. German finance would represent
a condition as chaotic as that of England. Whatever
advantage German credit might gain by holding
England's gold it would certainly be more than
offset by the fact that it was the ruthless action of
the German Government that had produced the
general catastrophe. A country that could sack
bank reserves would be a good one for foreign investors
to avoid: the essential of credit is confidence,
and those who repudiate it pay dearly for their
action. The German Generalissimo in London
might be no more civilized than Attila himself, but
he would soon find the difference between himself
and Attila. Attila, luckily for him, did not have to
worry about a bank rate and such-like complications;
but the German General, while trying to sack the
Bank of England, would find that his own balance
in the Bank of Germany would have vanished into
thin air, and the value of even the best of his investments
dwindled as though by a miracle; and that for
the sake of loot, amounting to a few sovereigns
apiece among his soldiery, he would have sacrificed
the greater part of his own personal fortune. It is as
certain as anything can be that, were the German
army guilty of such economic vandalism, there is no
considerable institution in Germany that would
escape grave damage—a damage in credit and security
so serious as to constitute a loss immensely
greater<a id="FNanchor_12_12"/><a href="#Footnote_12_12">[12]</a> than the value of the loot obtained. It is
not putting the case too strongly to say that for
every pound taken from the Bank of England German
trade would pay many times over. The influence
of the whole finance of Germany would be
brought to bear on the German Government to put
an end to a situation ruinous to German trade, and
German finance would only be saved from utter
collapse by an undertaking on the part of the German
Government scrupulously to respect private property,
and especially bank reserves. It is true the German
Jingoes might wonder what they had made war for,
and this elementary lesson in international finance
would do more than the greatness of the British navy
to cool their blood. For it is a fact in human nature
that men will fight more readily than they will pay,
and that they will take personal risks much more
readily than they will disgorge money, or, for that
matter, earn it. "Man," in the language of Bacon,
"loves danger better than travail."</p>
<p>Events which are still fresh in the memory of business
men show the extraordinary interdependence of
the modern financial world. A financial crisis in New
York sends up the English bank rate to 7 per cent.,
thus involving the ruin of many English businesses
which might otherwise have weathered a difficult
period. It thus happens that one section of the
financial world is, against its will, compelled to come
to the rescue of any other considerable section which
may be in distress.</p>
<p>From a modern and delightfully lucid treatise on
international finance,<a id="FNanchor_13_13"/><a href="#Footnote_13_13">[13]</a> I take the following very
suggestive passages:</p>
<blockquote><p>Banking in all countries hangs together so closely that
the strength of the best may easily be that of the weakest
if scandal arises owing to the mistakes of the worst....
Just as a man cycling down a crowded street depends for
his life not only on his skill, but more on the course of the
traffic there.... Banks in Berlin were obliged, from
motives of self-protection (on the occasion of the Wall
Street crisis), to let some of their gold go to assuage the
American craving for it.... If the crisis became so
severe that London had to restrict its facilities in this
respect, other centres, which habitually keep balances in
London which they regard as so much gold, because a
draft on London is as good as gold, would find themselves
very seriously inconvenienced; and it thus follows that
it is to the interest of all other centres which trade on
those facilities which London alone gives to take care
that London's task is not made too difficult. This is
especially so in the case of foreigners, who keep a balance
in London which is borrowed. In fact, London drew in
the gold required for New York from seventeen other
countries....</p></blockquote>
<p>Incidentally it may be mentioned in this connection
that German commerce is in a special sense
interested in the maintenance of English credit.
The authority just quoted says:</p>
<blockquote><p>It is even contended that the rapid expansion of German
trade, which pushed itself largely by its elasticity
and adaptability to the wishes of its customers, could
never have been achieved if it had not been assisted by
the large credit furnished in London.... No one can
quarrel with the Germans for making use of the credit
we offered for the expansion of the German trade, although
their over-extension of credit facilities has had
results which fall on others besides themselves....</p>
<p>Let us hope that our German friends are duly grateful,
and let us avoid the mistake of supposing that we have
done ourselves any permanent harm by giving this
assistance. It is to the economic interests of humanity
at large that production should be stimulated, and the
economic interest of humanity at large is the interest of
England, with its mighty world-wide trade. Germany
has quickened production with the help of English credit,
and so has every other economically civilized country in
the world. It is a fact that all of them, including our
own colonies, develop their resources with the help of
British capital and credit, and then do their utmost to
keep out our productions by means of tariffs, which make
it appear to superficial observers that England provides
capital for the destruction of its own business. But in
practice the system works quite otherwise, for all these
countries that develop their resources with our money
aim at developing an export trade and selling goods to us,
and as they have not yet reached the point of economic
altruism at which they are prepared to sell goods for
nothing, the increase in their production means an
increasing demand for our commodities and our services.
And in the meantime the interest on our capital and
credit, and the profits of working the machinery of
exchange, are a comfortable addition to our national
income.</p></blockquote>
<p>But what is a further corollary of this situation?
It is that Germany is to-day in a larger sense than
she ever was before England's debtor, and that her
industrial success is bound up with English financial
security.</p>
<p>What would be the situation in Britain, therefore,
on the morrow of a conflict in which that country was
successful?</p>
<p>I have seen mentioned the possibility of the conquest
and annexation of the free port of Hamburg
by a victorious British fleet. Let us assume that the
British Government has done this, and is proceeding
to turn the annexed and confiscated property to
account.</p>
<p>Now, the property was originally of two kinds:
part was private property, and part was German
Government, or rather Hamburg Government, property.
The income of the latter was earmarked for
the payment of interest of certain Government stock,
and the action of the British Government, therefore,
renders the stock all but valueless, and in the case of
the shares of the private companies entirely so. The
paper becomes unsaleable. But it is held in various
forms—as collateral and otherwise—by many important
banking concerns, insurance companies, and
so on, and this sudden collapse of value shatters their
solvency. Their collapse not only involves many
credit institutions in Germany, but, as these in their
turn are considerable debtors of London, English
institutions are also involved. London is also involved
in another way. As explained previously,
many foreign concerns keep balances in London, and
the action of the British Government having precipitated
a monetary crisis in Germany, there is a run
on London to withdraw all balances. In a double
sense London is feeling the pinch, and it would be a
miracle if already at this point the whole influence of
British finance were not thrown against the action of
the British Government. Assume, however, that the
Government, making the best of a bad job, continues
its administration of the property, and proceeds to
arrange for loans for the purpose of putting it once
more in good condition after the ravages of war.
The banks, however, finding that the original titles
have through the action of the British Government
become waste paper, and British financiers having
already burned their fingers with that particular
class of property, withhold support, and money is
only procurable at extortionate rates of interest—so
extortionate that it becomes quite evident that as
a Governmental enterprise the thing could not be
made to pay. An attempt is made to sell the property
to British and German concerns. But the same
paralyzing sense of insecurity hangs over the whole
business. Neither German nor British financiers can
forget that the bonds and shares of this property have
already been turned into waste paper by the action
of the British Government. The British Government
finds, in fact, that it can do nothing with the
financial world unless first it confirms the title of the
original owners to the property, and gives an assurance
that titles to all property throughout the
conquered territory shall be respected. In other
words, confiscation has been a failure.</p>
<p>It would really be interesting to know how those
who talk as though confiscation were still an economic
possibility would proceed to effect it. As
material property in the form of that booty which
used to constitute the spoils of victory in ancient
times, the gold and silver goblets, etc., would be
quite inconsiderable, and as Britain cannot carry
away sections of Berlin and Hamburg, she could only
annex the paper tokens of wealth—the shares and
bonds. But the value of those tokens depends upon
the reliance which can be placed upon the execution
of the contracts which they embody. The act of
military confiscation upsets all contracts, and the
courts of the country from which contracts derive
their force would be paralyzed if judicial decisions
were thrust aside by the sword. The value of the
stocks and shares would collapse, and the credit of
all those persons and institutions interested in such
property would also be shaken or shattered, and the
whole credit system, being thus at the mercy of alien
governors only concerned to exact tribute, would
collapse like a house of cards. German finance and
industry would show a condition of panic and disorder
beside which the worst crises of Wall Street
would pale into insignificance. Again, what would
be the inevitable result? The financial influence of
London itself would be thrown into the scale to
prevent a panic in which London financiers would be
involved. In other words, British financiers would
exert their influence upon the British Government to
stop the process of confiscation.</p>
<p>But the intangibility of wealth can be shown in
yet another fashion. I once asked an English
chartered accountant, very subject to attacks of
Germanophobia, how he supposed the Germans
would profit by the invasion of England, and he had
a very simple programme. Admitting the impossibility
of sacking the Bank of England, they would
reduce the British population to practical slavery,
and make them work for their foreign taskmasters,
as he put it, under the rifle and lash. He had it all
worked out in figures as to what the profit would
be to the conqueror. Very well, let us follow the
process. The population of Great Britain are not
allowed to spend their income, or at least are only
allowed to spend a portion of it, on themselves.
Their dietary is reduced more or less to a slave dietary,
and the bulk of what they earn is to be taken
by their "owners." But how is this income, which
so tempts the Germans, created—these dividends on
the railroad shares, the profits of the mills and mines
and provision companies and amusement concerns?
The dividends are due to the fact that the population
eat heartily, clothe themselves well, travel on railroads,
and go to theatres and music-halls. If they
are not allowed to do these things, if, in other words,
they cannot spend their money on these things, the
dividends disappear. If the German taskmasters
are to take these dividends, they must allow them to
be earned. If they allow them to be earned, they
must let the population live as it lived before—spending
their income on themselves; but if they
spend their income on themselves, what is there,
therefore, for the taskmasters? In other words, consumption
is a necessary factor of the whole thing.
Cut out consumption, and you cut out the profits.
This glittering wealth, which so tempted the invader,
has disappeared. If this is not intangibility, the
word has no meaning. Speaking broadly and generally,
the conqueror in our day has before him two
alternatives: to leave things alone, and in order to do
that he need not have left his shores; or to interfere
by confiscation in some form, in which case he dries
up the source of the profit which tempted him.</p>
<p>The economist may object that this does not
cover the case of such profit as "economic rent,"
and that dividends or profits being part of exchange,
a robber who obtains wealth without exchange can
afford to disregard them; or that the increased consumption
of the dispossessed English community
would be made up by the increased consumption of
the "owning" Germans.</p>
<p>If the political control of economic operations were
as simple a matter as in our minds we generally make
it, these objections would be sound. As it is, none of
them would in practice invalidate the general proposition
I have laid down. The division of labor in
the modern world is so complex—the simplest operation
of foreign trade involving not two nations
merely, but many—that the mere military control
of one party to an operation where many are concerned
could ensure neither shifting of the consumption
nor the monopolization of the profit within the
limits of the conquering group.</p>
<p>Here is a German manufacturer selling cinematograph
machines to a Glasgow suburb (which, incidentally,
lives by selling tools to Argentine ranchers,
who live by selling wheat to Newcastle boiler-makers).
Assuming even that Germany could transfer
the surplus spent in cinematograph shows to
Germany, what assurance has the German manufacturer
in question that the enriched Germans will
want cinematograph films? They may insist upon
champagne and cigars, coffee and Cognac, and the
French, Cubans, and Brazilians, to whom this "loot"
eventually goes, may not buy their machinery from
Germany at all, much less from the particular
German manufacturer, but in the United States or
Switzerland. The redistribution of the industrial
rôles might leave German industry in the lurch,
because at best the military power would only be
controlling one section of a complex operation, one
party to it out of many. When wealth was corn
or cattle, the transference by political or military
force of the possessions of one community to another
may have been possible, although even then, or in a
slightly more developed period, we saw the Roman
peasantry ruined by the slave exploitation of foreign
territory. How far this complexity of the international
division of labor tends to render futile the
other contrivances of conquest such as exclusive
markets, tribute, money indemnity, etc., succeeding
chapters may help to show.</p>
<h3>CHAPTER V</h3>
<p>FOREIGN TRADE AND MILITARY POWER</p>
<blockquote><p>Why trade cannot be destroyed or captured by a military Power—What
the processes of trade really are, and how a navy
affects them—<i>Dreadnoughts</i> and business—While <i>Dreadnoughts</i>
protect British trade from hypothetical German warships,
the real German merchant is carrying it off, or the Swiss or
the Belgian—The "commercial aggression" of Switzerland—What
lies at the bottom of the futility of military conquest—Government
brigandage becomes as profitless as private
brigandage—The real basis of commercial honesty on the
part of Government.</p></blockquote>
<p>Just as Mr. Harrison has declared that a "successful
invasion would mean to the English the total eclipse
of their commerce and trade, and with that trade the
means of feeding forty millions in their islands," so I
have seen it stated in a leading English paper that
"if Germany were extinguished to-morrow, the day
after to-morrow there is not an Englishman in the
world who would not be the richer. Nations have
fought for years over a city or right of succession.
Must they not fight for 1250 million dollars of
yearly commerce?"</p>
<p>What does the "extinction" of Germany mean?
Does it mean that Britain shall slay in cold blood sixty
or seventy millions of men, women, and children?
Otherwise, even though the fleet and army were annihilated
the country's sixty millions of workers would
still remain,—all the more industrious, as they
would have undergone great suffering and privation—prepared
to exploit their mines and workshops
with as much thoroughness and thrift and industry
as ever, and consequently just as much trade rivals
as ever, army or no army, navy or no navy.</p>
<p>Even if the British could annihilate Germany, they
would annihilate such an important section of their
debtors as to create hopeless panic in London, and
that panic would so react on their own trade that it
would be in no sort of condition to take the place
which Germany had previously occupied in neutral
markets, leaving aside the question that by the act
of annihilation a market equal to that of Canada and
South Africa combined would be destroyed.</p>
<p>What does this sort of thing mean? Am I wrong
in saying that the whole subject is overlaid and
dominated by a jargon which may have had some
relation to facts at one time, but from which in our
day all meaning has departed?</p>
<p>The English patriot may say that he does not mean
permanent destruction, but only temporary "annihilation."
(And this, of course, on the other side,
would mean not permanent, but only temporary
acquisition of that 1250 millions of trade.)</p>
<p>He might, like Mr. Harrison, put the case conversely—that
if Germany could get command of the
sea she could cut England off from its customers and
intercept its trade for her benefit. This notion is
as absurd as the other. It has already been shown
that the "utter destruction of credit" and "incalculable
chaos in the financial world," which Mr.
Harrison foresees as the result of Germany's invasion,
could not possibly leave German finance unaffected.
It is a very open question whether her chaos
would not be as great as the English. In any case,
it would be so great as thoroughly to disorganize her
industry, and in that disorganized condition it would
be out of the question for her to secure the markets
left unsupplied by England's isolation. Moreover,
those markets would also be disorganized, because
they depend upon England's ability to buy, which
Germany would be doing her best to destroy. From
the chaos which she herself had created, Germany
could derive no possible benefit, and she could only
terminate financial disorder, fatal to her own trade,
by bringing to an end the condition which had produced
it—that is, by bringing to an end the isolation
of Great Britain.</p>
<p>With reference to this section of the subject we
can with absolute certainty say two things: (1) That
Germany can only destroy British trade by destroying
British population; and (2) that if she could
destroy that population, which she could not, she
would destroy one of her most valuable markets, as
at the present time she sells to it more than it sells to
her. The whole point of view involves a fundamental
misconception of the real nature of commerce
and industry.</p>
<p>Commerce is simply and purely the exchange of
one product for another. If the British manufacturer
can make cloth, or cutlery, or machinery, or pottery,
or ships cheaper or better than his rivals, he will obtain
the trade; if he cannot, if his goods are inferior
or dearer, or appeal less to his customers, his rivals
will secure the trade, and the possession of <i>Dreadnoughts</i>
will make not a whit of difference. Switzerland,
without a single <i>Dreadnought</i>, will drive him
out of the market even of his own colonies, as, indeed,
she is driving him out.<a id="FNanchor_14_14"/><a href="#Footnote_14_14">[14]</a> The factors which really
constitute prosperity have not the remotest connection
with military or naval power, all our political
jargon notwithstanding. To destroy the commerce
of forty million people Germany would have to
destroy Britain's coal and iron mines, to destroy the
energy, character, and resourcefulness of its population;
to destroy, in short, the determination of forty
million people to make their living by the work of
their hands. Were we not hypnotized by this
extraordinary illusion, we should accept as a matter
of course that the prosperity of a people depends upon
such facts as the natural wealth of the country in
which they live, their social discipline and industrial
character, the result of years, of generations, of centuries,
it may be, of tradition and slow, elaborate,
selective processes; and, in addition to all these
deep-seated elementary factors, upon countless
commercial and financial ramifications—a special
technical capacity for such-and-such a manufacture,
a special aptitude for meeting the peculiarities of such
and-such a market, the efficient equipment of elaborately
constructed workshops, the existence of a
population trained to given trades—a training not
infrequently involving years, and even generations,
of effort. All this, according to Mr. Harrison, is to
go for nothing, and Germany is to be able to replace
it in the twinkling of an eye, and forty million people
are to sit down helplessly because Germany has been
victorious at sea. On the morrow of her marvellous
victory Germany is by some sort of miracle to find
shipyards, foundries, cotton-mills, looms, factories,
coal and iron mines, and all their equipment, suddenly
created in order to take the trade that the most successful
manufacturers and traders in the world have
been generations in building up. Germany is to be
able suddenly to produce three or four times what
her population has hitherto been able to produce; for
she must either do that or leave the markets which
England has supplied heretofore still available to
English effort. What has really fed these forty
millions, who are to starve on the morrow of Germany's
naval victory, is the fact that the coal and
iron exported by them have been sent in one form or
another to populations which need those products.
Is that need suddenly to cease, or are the forty
millions suddenly to be struck with some sort of
paralysis, that all this vast industry is coming to an
end? What has the defeat of English ships at sea
to do with the fact that the Canadian farmer wants
to buy English manufactures and pay for them with
his wheat? It may be true that Germany could
stop the importation of that wheat. But why should
she want to do so? How would it benefit her people
to do so? By what sort of miracle is she suddenly
to be able to supply products which have kept forty
million people busy? By what sort of miracle is she
suddenly to be able to double her industrial population?
And by what sort of miracle is she to be able
to consume the wheat, because if she cannot take
the wheat the Canadian cannot buy her products?
I am aware that all this is elementary, that it is
economics in words of one syllable; but what are the
economics of Mr. Harrison and those who think
like him when he talks in the strain of the passage
that I have just quoted?</p>
<p>There is just one other possible meaning that the
English patriot may have in his mind. He may
plead that great military and naval establishments
do not exist for the purpose of the conquest of territory
or of destroying a rival's trade, but for "protecting"
or indirectly aiding trade and industry. We
are allowed to infer that in some not clearly defined
way a great Power can aid the trade of its citizens by
the use of the prestige which a great navy and a great
army bring, and by exercising bargaining power, in
the matter of tariffs, with other nations. But
again the condition of the small nations in Europe
gives the lie to this assumption.</p>
<p>It is evident that the neutral does not buy English
products and refuse Germany's because England
has a larger navy. If one can imagine the representatives
of an English and a German firm meeting in
the office of a merchant in Argentina, or Brazil, or
Bulgaria, or Finland, both of them selling cutlery,
the German is not going to secure the order because
he is able to show the Argentinian, or the Brazilian,
or the Bulgarian, or the Finn that Germany has
twelve <i>Dreadnoughts</i> and England only eight. The
German will take the order if, on the whole, he can
make a more advantageous offer to the prospective
buyer, and for no other reason whatsoever, and the
buyer will go to the merchant of any nation whatever,
whether he be German, or Swiss, or Belgian, or British,
irrespective of the armies and navies which may lie
behind the nationality of the seller. Nor does it
appear that armies and navies weigh in the least
when it comes to a question of a tariff bargain.
Switzerland wages a tariff war with Germany, and
wins. The whole history of the trade of the small
nations shows that the political prestige of the great
ones gives them practically no commercial advantage.</p>
<p>We continually talk as though carrying trade were
in some special sense the result of the growth of a
great navy, but Norway has a carrying trade which,
relatively to her population, is nearly three times as
great as Britain's, and the same reasons which would
make it impossible for another nation to confiscate
the gold reserve of the Bank of England would make
it impossible for another nation to confiscate British
shipping on the morrow of a British naval defeat.
In what way can her carrying trade or any other
trade be said to depend upon military power?</p>
<p>As I write these lines there comes to my notice a
series of articles in the London <i>Daily Mail</i>, written
by Mr. F.A. McKenzie, explaining how it is that
England is losing the trade of Canada. In one article
he quotes a number of Canadian merchants:</p>
<blockquote><p>"We buy very little direct from England," said Mr.
Harry McGee, one of the vice-presidents of the company,
in answer to my questions. "We keep a staff in London
of twenty, supervising our European purchases, but the
orders go mostly to France, Germany, and Switzerland,
and not to England."</p></blockquote>
<p>And in a further article he notes that many orders
are going to Belgium. Now the question arises:
What more can a navy do that it has not done for
England in Canada? And yet the trade goes to
Switzerland and Belgium. Is England going to
protect herself against the commercial "aggression"
of Switzerland by building a dozen more <i>Dreadnoughts</i>?
Suppose she could conquer Switzerland
and Belgium with her <i>Dreadnoughts</i>, would not the
trade of Switzerland and Belgium go on all the same?
Her arms have brought her Canada—but no monopoly
of the Canadian orders, which go, in part, to
Switzerland.</p>
<p>If the traders of little nations can snap their fingers
at the great war lords, why do British traders need
<i>Dreadnoughts</i>? If Swiss commercial prosperity is
secure from the aggression of a neighbor who outweighs
Switzerland in military power a hundred to
one, how comes it that the trade and industry, the
very life-bread of her children, as Mr. Harrison would
have us believe, of the greatest nation in history is in
danger of imminent annihilation the moment she
loses her military predominance?</p>
<p>If the statesmen of Europe would tell us <i>how</i> the
military power of a great nation is used to advance
the commercial interest of its citizens, would explain
to us the <i>modus operandi</i>, and not refer us to large
and vague phrases about "exercising due weight in
the councils of the nations," we might accept their
philosophy. But, until they do so, we are surely
justified in assuming that their political terminology
is simply a survival—an inheritance from a state of
things which has, in fact, passed away.</p>
<p>It is facts of the nature of those I have instanced
which constitute the real protection of the small
State, and which are bound as they gain in general
recognition to constitute the real protection from
outside aggression of all States, great or small.</p>
<p>One financial authority from whom I have quoted
noted that this elaborate financial interdependence
of the modern world has grown up in spite of ourselves,
"without our noticing it until we put it to
some rude test." Men are fundamentally just as
disposed as they were at any time to take wealth
that does not belong to them, which they have not
earned. But their relative interest in the matter has
changed. In very primitive conditions robbery is a
moderately profitable enterprise. Where the rewards
of labor, owing to the inefficiency of the means of
production, are small and uncertain, and where all
wealth is portable, raiding and theft offer the best
reward for the enterprise of the courageous; in such
conditions the size of man's wealth depends a good
deal on the size of his club and the agility with which
he wields it. But to the man whose wealth so largely
depends upon his credit and on his paper being "good
paper" at the bank, dishonesty has become as precarious
and profitless as honest toil was in more
primitive times.</p>
<p>The instincts of the business man may, at bottom,
be just as predatory as those of the cattle-lifter or the
robber baron, but taking property by force has become
one of the least profitable and the most speculative
forms of enterprise upon which he could engage.
The force of commercial events has rendered the
thing impossible. I know that the defender of arms
will reply that it is the police who have rendered it
impossible. This is not true. There were as many
armed men in Europe in the days when the robber
baron carried on his occupation as there are in our
day. To say that the policeman makes him impossible
is to put the cart before the horse. What
created the police and made them possible, if it was
not the general recognition of the fact that disorder
and aggression make trade impossible?</p>
<p>Just note what is taking place in South America.
States in which repudiation was a commonplace of
everyday politics have of recent years become as
stable and as respectable as the City of London, and
have come to discharge their obligations as regularly.
These countries were during hundreds of years a
slough of disorder and a never-ending sanguinary
scramble for the spoils, and yet in a matter of
fifteen or twenty years the conditions have radically
changed. Does this mean that the nature of these
populations has fundamentally altered in less than a
generation? In that case many a militarist claim
must be rejected. There is a simpler explanation.</p>
<p>These countries, like Brazil and the Argentine,
have been drawn into the circle of international
trade, exchange, and finance. Their economic relationships
have become sufficiently extensive and
complex to make repudiation the least profitable
form of theft. The financier will tell you "they
cannot afford to repudiate." If any attempt at
repudiation were made, all sorts of property, either
directly or indirectly connected with the orderly
execution of Governmental functions, would suffer,
banks would become involved, great businesses
would stagger, and the whole financial community
would protest. To attempt to escape the payment
of a single loan would involve the business world in
losses amounting to many times the value of the
loan.</p>
<p>It is only where a community has nothing to lose,
no banks, no personal fortunes dependent upon public
good faith, no great businesses, no industries,
that the Government can afford to repudiate its
obligations or to disregard the general code of economic
morality. This was the case with Argentina
and Brazil a generation ago; it is still the case, to
some extent, with some Central American States
to-day. <i>It is not because the armies in these States
have grown</i> that the public credit has improved.
Their armies were greater a generation ago than they
are now. It is because they know that trade and
finance are built upon credit—that is, confidence in
the fulfilment of obligations, upon security of tenure
in titles, upon the enforcement of contract according
to law—and that if credit is seriously shaken, there
is not a section of the elaborate fabric which is not
affected.</p>
<p>The more our commercial system gains in complication,
the more does the common prosperity of all
of us come to depend upon the reliance which can be
placed on the due performance of all contracts. This
is the real basis of "prestige," national and individual;
circumstances stronger than ourselves are
pushing us, despite what the cynical critics of our
commercial civilization may say, towards the unvarying
observance of this simple ideal. When we
drop back from it—and such relapses occur as we
should expect them to occur, especially in those
societies which have just emerged from a more or
less primitive state—punishment is generally swift
and sure.</p>
<p>What was the real origin of the bank crisis of 1907
in the United States, which had for American business
men such disastrous consequences? It was the
loss by American financiers and American bankers
of the confidence of the American public. At bottom
there was no other reason. One talks of cash
reserves and currency errors; but London, which
does the banking of the universe, works on the smallest
cash reserve in the world, because, as an American
authority has put it, English bankers work with a
"psychological reserve."</p>
<p>I quote from Mr. Withers:</p>
<blockquote><p>It is because they (English bankers) are so safe, so
straight, so sensible, from an American point of view so
unenterprising, that they are able to build up a bigger
credit fabric on a smaller gold basis, and even carry this
building to a height which they themselves have decided
to be questionable. This "psychological reserve" is the
priceless possession that has been handed down through
generations of good bankers, and every individual of
every generation who receives it can do something to
maintain and improve it.</p></blockquote>
<p>But it was not always thus, and it is merely the
many ramifications of the English commercial and
financial world that have brought this about. In
the end the Americans will imitate it, or they will
suffer from a hopeless disadvantage in their financial
competition with England. Commercial development
is broadly illustrating one profound truth:
that the real basis of social morality is self-interest.
If English banks and insurance companies have
become absolutely honest in their administration,
it is because the dishonesty of any one of them
threatened the prosperity of all.</p>
<p>Must we assume that the Governments of the world,
which, presumably, are directed by men as far-sighted
as bankers, are permanently to fall below the
banker in their conception of enlightened self-interest?
Must we assume that what is self-evident to the
banker—namely, that the repudiation of engagements,
or any attempt at financial plunder, is sheer
stupidity and commercial suicide—is for ever to
remain unperceived by the ruler? Then, when he
realizes this truth, shall we not at least have made
some progress towards laying the foundations for a
sane international polity?</p>
<p>The following correspondence, provoked by the
first edition of this book, may throw light on some
of the points dealt with in this chapter. A correspondent
of London <i>Public Opinion</i> criticized a part of
the thesis here dealt with as a "series of half-truths,"
questioning as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>What is "natural wealth," and how can trade be carried
on with it unless there are markets for it when
worked? Would the writer maintain that markets cannot
be permanently or seriously affected by military
conquests, especially if conquest be followed by the
imposition upon the vanquished of commercial conditions
framed in the interests of the victor?... Germany
has derived, and continues to derive, great advantages
from the most-favored-nation clause which she compelled
France to insert in the Treaty of Frankfurt....
Bismarck, it is true, underestimated the financial resilience
of France, and was sorely disappointed when the
French paid off the indemnity with such astonishing
rapidity, and thus liberated themselves from the equally
crushing burden of having to maintain the German army
of occupation. He regretted not having demanded an
indemnity twice as large. Germany would not repeat the
mistake, and any country having the misfortune to be
vanquished by her in future will be likely to find its
commercial prosperity compromised for decades.</p></blockquote>
<p>To which I replied:</p>
<blockquote><p>Will your correspondent forgive my saying that while
he talks of half-truths, the whole of this passage indicates
the domination of that particular half-truth which lies at
the bottom of the illusion with which my book deals?</p>
<p>What is a market? Your correspondent evidently
conceives it as a place where things are sold. That is
only half the truth. It is a place where things are bought
and sold, and one operation is impossible without the
other, and the notion that one nation can sell for ever and
never buy is simply the theory of perpetual motion
applied to economics; and international trade can no more
be based upon perpetual motion than can engineering.
As between economically highly-organized nations a
customer must also be a competitor, a fact which bayonets
cannot alter. To the extent to which they destroy
him as a competitor, they destroy him, speaking generally,
and largely, as a customer.</p>
<p>The late Mr. Seddon conceived England as making
her purchases with "a stream of golden sovereigns" flowing
from a stock all the time getting smaller. That
"practical" man, however, who so despised "mere
theories," was himself the victim of a pure theory, and
the picture which he conjured up from his inner consciousness
has no existence in fact. England has hardly
enough gold to pay one year's taxes, and if she paid for
her imports in gold she would exhaust her stock in three
months; and the process by which she really pays has
been going on for sixty years. She is a buyer just as long
as she is a seller, and if she is to afford a market to Germany
she must procure the money wherewith to pay for
Germany's goods by selling goods to Germany or elsewhere,
and if that process of sale stops, Germany loses a
market, not only the English market, but also those
markets which depend in their turn upon England's
capacity to buy—that is to say, to sell, for, again, the one
operation is impossible without the other.</p>
<p>If your correspondent had had the whole process in his
mind instead of half of it, I do not think that he would
have written the passages I have quoted. In his endorsement
of the Bismarckian conception of political economy
he evidently deems that one nation's gain is the measure
of another nation's loss, and that nations live by robbing
their neighbors in a lesser or greater degree. This is
economics in the style of Tamerlane and the Red Indian,
and, happily, has no relation to the real facts of modern
commercial intercourse.</p>
<p>The conception of one-half of the case only, dominates
your correspondent's letter throughout. He says, "Germany
has derived, and continues to derive, great advantage
from the most-favored-nation clause which she
compelled France to insert in the Treaty of Frankfurt,"
which is quite true, but leaves out the other half of the
truth, somewhat important to our discussion—viz., that
France has also greatly benefited, in that the scope of
fruitless tariff war has been by so much restricted.</p>
<p>A further illustration: Why should Germany have
been sorely disappointed at France's rapid recovery?
The German people are not going to be the richer for
having a poor neighbor—on the contrary, they are
going to be the poorer, and there is not an economist with
a reputation to lose, whatever his views of fiscal policy,
who would challenge this for a moment.</p>
<p>How would Germany impose upon a vanquished England
commercial arrangements which would impoverish
the vanquished and enrich the victor? By enforcing
another Frankfurt treaty, by which English ports should
be kept open to German goods? But that is precisely
what English ports have been for sixty years, and Germany
has not been obliged to wage a costly war to effect
it. Would Germany close her own markets to our goods?
But, again, that is precisely what she has done—again
without war, and by a right which we never dream of
challenging. How is war going to affect the question
one way or another? I have been asking for a detailed
answer to that question from European publicists and
statesmen for the last ten years, and I have never yet
been answered, save by much vagueness, much fine
phrasing concerning commercial supremacy, a spirited
foreign policy, national prestige, and much else, which
no one seems able to define, but a real policy, a <i>modus
operandi</i>, a balance-sheet which one can analyze, never.
And until such is forthcoming I shall continue to believe
that the whole thing is based upon an illusion.</p>
<p>The true test of fallacies of this kind is progression.
Imagine Germany (as our Jingoes seem to dream of her)
absolute master of Europe, and able to dictate any policy
that she pleased. How would she treat such a European
empire? By impoverishing its component parts? But
that would be suicidal. Where would her big industrial
population find their markets?<a id="FNanchor_15_15"/><a href="#Footnote_15_15">[15]</a> If she set out to develop
and enrich the component parts, these would become
merely efficient competitors, and she need not have
undertaken the costliest war of history to arrive at that
result. This is the paradox, the futility of conquest—the
great illusion which the history of our own Empire so
well illustrates. We British "own" our Empire by
allowing its component parts to develop themselves in
their own way, and in view of their own ends, and all the
empires which have pursued any other policy have only
ended by impoverishing their own populations and falling
to pieces.</p>
<p>Your correspondent asks: "Is Mr. Norman Angell prepared
to maintain that Japan has derived no political
or commercial advantages from her victories, and that
Russia has suffered no loss from defeat?"</p>
<p>What I am prepared to maintain, and what the experts
know to be the truth, is that the Japanese people are the
poorer, not the richer for their war, and that the Russian
people will gain more from defeat than they could possibly
have gained by victory, since defeat will constitute a
check on the economically sterile policy of military and
territorial aggrandizement and turn Russian energies to
social and economic development; and it is because of
this fact that Russia is at the present moment, despite
her desperate internal troubles, showing a capacity for
economic regeneration as great as, if not greater than,
that of Japan. This latter country is breaking all modern
records, civilized or uncivilized, in the burdensomeness
of her taxation. On the average, the Japanese people pay
30 per cent.—nearly one-third—of their net income in
taxation in one form or another, and so far have they
been compelled to push the progressive principle that a
Japanese lucky enough to possess an income of ten
thousand a year has to surrender over six thousand of
it in taxation, a condition of things which would, of
course, create a revolution in any European country in
twenty-four hours. And this is quoted as a result so
brilliant that those who question it cannot be doing so
seriously!<a id="FNanchor_16_16"/><a href="#Footnote_16_16">[16]</a> On the other side, for the first time in twenty
years the Russian Budget shows a surplus.</p>
<p>This recovery of the defeated nation after wars is not
even peculiar to our generation. Ten years after the
Franco-Prussian War France was in a better financial
position than Germany, as she is in a better financial
position to-day, and though her foreign trade does not
show as great expansion as that of Germany—because
her population remains absolutely stationary, while that
of Germany increases by leaps and bounds—the French
people as a whole are more prosperous, more comfortable,
more economically secure, with a greater reserve of savings,
and all the moral and social advantages that go
therewith, than are the Germans. In the same way the
social and industrial renaissance of modern Spain dates
from the day that she was defeated and lost her colonies,
and it is since her defeat that Spanish securities have just
doubled in value.<a id="FNanchor_17_17"/><a href="#Footnote_17_17">[17]</a> It is since England added the "gold-fields
of the world" to her "possessions" that British
Consols have dropped twenty points. Such is the outcome
in terms of social well-being of military success and
political prestige!</p></blockquote>
<h3>CHAPTER VI</h3>
<p>THE INDEMNITY FUTILITY</p>
<blockquote><p>The real balance-sheet of the Franco-German War—Disregard of
Sir Robert Giffen's warning in interpreting the figures—What
really happened in France and Germany during the decade
following the war—Bismarck's disillusionment—The necessary
discount to be given an indemnity—The bearing of the
war and its result on German prosperity and progress.</p></blockquote>
<p>In politics it is unfortunately true that ten dollars
which can be seen bulk more largely in the public
mind than a million which happen to be out of sight
but are none the less real. Thus, however clearly
the wastefulness of war and the impossibility of effecting
by its means any permanent economic or social
advantage for the conqueror may be shown, the fact
that Germany was able to exact an indemnity of a
billion dollars from France at the close of the war of
1870-71 is taken as conclusive evidence that a nation
can "make money by war."</p>
<p>In 1872, Sir Robert (then Mr.) Giffen wrote a
notable article summarizing the results of the Franco-German
War thus: it meant to France a loss of 3500
million dollars, and to Germany a total net gain of
870 millions, a money difference in favor of Germany
exceeding in value the whole amount of the
British National Debt!</p>
<p>An arithmetical statement of this kind seems at
first sight so conclusive that those who have since
discussed the financial outcome of the war of 1870
have quite overlooked the fact that, if such a balance-sheet
as that indicated be sound, the whole financial
history of Germany and France during the forty
years which have followed the war is meaningless.</p>
<p>The truth is, of course, that such a balance-sheet
is meaningless—a verdict which does not reflect upon
Sir Robert Giffen, because he drew it up in ignorance
of the sequel of the war. It does, however, reflect
on those who have adopted the result shown on such
a balance-sheet. Indeed, Sir Robert Giffen himself
made the most important reservations. He had at
least an inkling of the practical difficulties of profiting
by an indemnity, and indicated plainly that the
nominal figures had to be very heavily discounted.</p>
<p>A critic<a id="FNanchor_18_18"/><a href="#Footnote_18_18">[18]</a> of an early edition of this book seems to
have adopted most of Sir Robert Giffen's figures,
disregarding, however, certain of his reservations,
and to this critic I replied as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>In arriving at this balance my critic, like the company-promoting
genius who promises you 150 per cent. for
your money, leaves so much out of the account. There
are a few items not considered, <i>e.g.</i> the increase in the
French army which took place immediately after the
war, and as the direct result thereof, compelled Germany
to increase her army by at least one hundred thousand
men, an increase which has been maintained for forty
years. The expenditure throughout this time amounts to
at least a billion dollars. We have already wiped out the
"profit," and I have only dealt with one item yet—to this we
must add,—loss of markets for Germany involved in the
destruction of so many French lives and so much French
wealth; loss from the general disturbance throughout
Europe, and still greater loss from the fact that the unproductive
expenditure on armaments throughout the
greater part of Europe which has followed the war, the
diversion of energies which is the result of it, has directly
deprived Germany of large markets and by a general check
of development indirectly deprived her of immense ones.</p>
<p>But it is absurd to bring figures to bear on such a
system of bookkeeping as that adopted by my critic.
Germany had several years' preparation for the war, and
has had, as the direct result thereof and as an integral
part of the general war system which her own policy
supports, certain obligations during forty years. All this
is ignored. Just note how the same principle would work
if applied in ordinary commercial matters; because, for
instance, on an estate the actual harvest only takes a
fortnight, you disregard altogether the working expenses
for the remaining fifty weeks of the year, charge only the
actual cost of the harvest (and not all of that), deduct
this from the gross proceeds of the crops, and call the
result "profit"! Such "finance" is really luminous.
Applied by the ordinary business man, it would in an
incredibly short time put his business in the bankruptcy
court and himself in gaol!</p>
<p>But were my critic's figures as complete as they are
absurdly incomplete and misleading, I should still be
unimpressed, because the facts which stare us in the face
would not corroborate his statistical performance. We
are examining what is from the money point of view the
most successful war ever recorded in history, and if the
general proposition that such a war is financially profitable
were sound, and if the results of the war were anything
like as brilliant as they are represented, money
should be cheaper and more plentiful in Germany than
in France, and credit, public and private, should be
sounder. Well, it is the exact reverse which is the case.
As a net result of the whole thing Germany was, ten
years after the war, a good deal worse off, financially,
than her vanquished rival, and was at that date trying,
as she is trying to-day, to borrow money from her victim.
Within twenty months of the payment of the last of
the indemnity, the bank rate was higher in Berlin than
in Paris, and we know that Bismarck's later life was
clouded by the spectacle of what he regarded as an absurd
miracle: the vanquished recovering more quickly
than the victor. We have the testimony of his own
speeches to this fact, and to the fact that France weathered
the financial storms of 1878-9 a great deal better
than did Germany. And to-day, when Germany is compelled
to pay nearly 4 per cent. for money, France can
secure it for 3.... We are not for the moment considering
anything but the money view—the advantages
and disadvantages of a certain financial operation—and
by any test that you care to apply, France, the vanquished,
is better off than Germany, the victor. The
French people are as a whole more prosperous, more
comfortable, more economically secure, with greater
reserve of savings and all the moral and social advantages
that go therewith, than are the Germans, a fact expressed
briefly by French Rentes standing at 98 and German
Consols at 83. There is something wrong with a financial
operation that gives these results.</p></blockquote>
<p>The something wrong, of course, is that in order
to arrive at any financial profit at all essential facts
have to be disregarded, those facts being what necessarily
precedes and what necessarily follows a war
of this kind. In the case of highly organized industrial
nations like England and Germany, dependent
for the very livelihood of great masses of their population
upon the fact that neighboring nations furnish
a market for their goods, a general policy of "piracy,"
imposing upon those neighbors an expenditure
which limits their purchasing power, creates a burden
of which the nation responsible for that policy of
piracy pays its part. It is not France alone which
has paid the greater part of the real cost of the Franco-German
War, it is Europe—and particularly Germany—in
the burdensome military system and the
general political situation which that war has created
or intensified.</p>
<p>But there is a more special consideration connected
with the exaction of an indemnity, which demands
notice, and that is the practical difficulty with regard
to the transfer of an immense sum of money outside
the ordinary operations of commerce.</p>
<p>The history of the German experience with the
French indemnity suggests the question whether in
every case an enormous discount on the nominal
value of a large money indemnity must not be allowed
owing to the practical financial difficulties of
its payment and receipt, difficulties unavoidable in
any circumstances which we need consider.</p>
<p>These difficulties were clearly foreseen by Sir Robert
Giffen, though his warnings, and the important reservations
that he made on this point, are generally
overlooked by those who wish to make use of his
conclusions.</p>
<p>These warnings he summarized as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>As regards Germany, a doubt is expressed whether the
Germans will gain so much as France loses, the capital of
the indemnity being transferred from individuals to the
German Government, who cannot use it so profitably as
individuals. It is doubted whether the practice of lending
out large sums, though a preferable course to locking
them up, will not in the end be injurious.</p>
<p>The financial operations incidental to these great losses
and expenses seriously affect the money market. They
have been a fruitful cause, in the first place, of spasmodic
disturbance. The outbreak of war caused a monetary
panic in July, 1870, by the anxiety of people who had
money engagements to meet to provide against the
chances of war, and there was another monetary crash in
September, 1871, owing to the sudden withdrawal by the
German Government of the money it had to receive.
The war thus illustrates the tendency of wars in general
to cause spasmodic disturbance in a market so delicately
organized as that of London now is.</p></blockquote>
<p>And it is to be noted in this connection that the
difficulties of 1872 were trifling compared to what
they would necessarily be in our day. In 1872,
Germany was self-sufficing, little dependent upon
credit; to-day undisturbed credit in Europe is the
very life-blood of her industry; it is, in fact, the very
food of her people, as the events of 1911 have sufficiently
proved.</p>
<p>It is not generally realized how abundantly the
whole history of the German indemnity bears out
Sir Robert Giffen's warning; how this flood of gold
turned indeed to dust and ashes as far as the German
nation is concerned.</p>
<p>First, anyone familiar with financial problems
might have expected that the receipt of so large a
sum of money by Germany would cause prices to rise
and so handicap export trade in competition with
France, where the reverse process would cause prices
to fall. This result was, in fact, produced. M.
Paul Beaulieu and M. Léon Say<a id="FNanchor_19_19"/><a href="#Footnote_19_19">[19]</a> have both shown
that this factor operated through the value of commercial
bills of exchange, giving to the French exporter
a bonus and to the German a handicap which
affected trade most perceptibly. Captain Bernard
Serrigny, who has collected in his work a wealth of
evidence bearing on this subject, writes:</p>
<blockquote><p>The rise in prices influenced seriously the cost of production,
and the German manufacturers fought, in consequence,
at a disadvantage with England and France.
Finally the goods produced at this high cost were thrown
upon the home market at the moment when the increase
in the cost of living was diminishing seriously the purchasing
power of the bulk of consumers. These goods
had to compete, not only with home over-production due
to the failure to sell abroad, but with foreign goods,
which, despite the tariff, were by their lower price able
to push their way into the German market, where relatively
higher prices attracted them. In this competition
France was particularly prominent. In France the lack
of metallic money had engendered great financial caution,
and had considerably lowered prices all around, so that
there was a general financial and commercial condition
very different from that in Germany, where the payment
of the indemnity had been followed by reckless
speculation. Moreover, owing to the heavy foreign payments
made by France, bills drawn on foreign centres
were at a premium, a premium which constituted a
sensible additional profit to French exporters, so considerable
in certain cases that it was worth while for
French manufacturers to sell their goods at an actual
loss in order to realize the profit on the bill of exchange.
The German market was thus being captured by the
French at the very moment when the Germans supposed
they would, thanks to the indemnity, be starting out to
capture the world.</p></blockquote>
<p>The German economist Max Wirth ("Geschichte der
Handelskrisen") expressed in 1874 his astonishment
at France's financial and industrial recovery: "The
most striking example of the economic force of the
country is shown by the exports, which rose immediately
after the signature of peace, despite a war which
swallowed a hundred thousand lives and more than
ten milliards (two billion dollars)." A similar conclusion
is drawn by Professor Biermer ("Fürst Bismarck
als Volkswirt"), who indicates that the Protectionist
movement in 1879 was to a large extent due to the
result of the payment of the indemnity.</p>
<p>This disturbance of the balance of trade, however,
was only one factor among several: the financial
disorganization, a fictitious expansion of expenditure
creating a morbid speculation, precipitated the worst
financial crisis in Germany which she has known in
modern times. Monsieur Lavisse summarizes the
experience thus:</p>
<blockquote><p>Enormous sums of money were lost. If one takes the
aggregate of the securities quoted on the Berlin Bourse,
railroad, mining and industrial securities generally, it is
by thousands of millions of marks that one must estimate
the value of such securities in 1870 and 1871. But a large
number of enterprises were started in Germany of which
the Berlin Bourse knew nothing. Cologne, Hamburg,
Frankfurt, Leipzig, Breslau, Stuttgart, had all their local
groups of speculative securities; hundreds of millions
must be added to the thousands of millions. These differences
did not represent merely a transfer of wealth, for a
great proportion of the capital sunk was lost altogether,
having been eaten up in ill-considered and unattractive
expenditure.... There can be no sort of doubt that
the money lost in these worthless enterprises constitutes
an absolute loss for Germany.</p></blockquote>
<p>The decade from 1870-1880 was for France a great
recuperative period, although for several other nations
in Europe it was one of great depression, notably,
after the "boom" of 1872, for Germany. No
less an authority than Bismarck himself testifies to
the double fact. We know that Bismarck was astonished
and dismayed by seeing the regeneration of
France after the war taking place more rapidly and
more completely than the regeneration of Germany.
This weighed so heavily upon his mind that in introducing
his Protectionist Bill in 1879 he declared that
Germany was "slowly bleeding to death," and that
if the present process were continued she would find
herself ruined. Speaking in the Reichstag on May
2, 1879, he said:</p>
<blockquote><p>We see that France manages to support the present
difficult business situation of the civilized world better
than we do; that her Budget has increased since 1871 by
a milliard and a half, and that thanks not only to loans;
we see that she has more resources than Germany, and
that, in short, over there they complain less of bad
times.</p></blockquote>
<p>And in a speech two years later (November 29,
1881) he returned to the same idea:</p>
<blockquote><p>It was towards 1877 that I was first struck with the
general and growing distress in Germany as compared
with France. I saw furnaces banked, the standard of
well-being reduced, and the general position of workmen
becoming worse and business as a whole terribly bad.</p></blockquote>
<p>In the book from which these extracts are taken<a id="FNanchor_20_20"/><a href="#Footnote_20_20">[20]</a>
the author writes as an introduction to Bismarck's
speeches:</p>
<blockquote><p>Trade and industry were in a miserable condition.
Thousands of workmen were without employment, and
in the winter of 1876-77 unemployment took great proportions,
and soup-kitchens and State workshops had to
be established.</p></blockquote>
<p>Every author who deals with this period seems to
tell broadly the same tale, however much they may
differ in detail. "If only we could get back to the general
position of things before the war," said M. Block
in 1879. "But salaries diminish and prices go up."<a id="FNanchor_21_21"/><a href="#Footnote_21_21">[21]</a></p>
<p>At the very time that the French millions were
raining in upon Germany (1873) she was suffering
from a grave financial crisis, and so little effect did
the transfer of the money have upon trade and finance
in general, that twelve months after the payment of
the last of the indemnity we find the bank rate higher
in Berlin than in Paris; and, as was shown by the
German economist Soetbeer, by the year 1878 far
more money was in circulation in France than in
Germany.<a id="FNanchor_22_22"/><a href="#Footnote_22_22">[22]</a> Hans Blum, indeed, directly ascribed
the series of crises between the years 1873 and 1880
to the indemnity: "A burst of prosperity and then
ruin for thousands."<a id="FNanchor_23_23"/><a href="#Footnote_23_23">[23]</a> Throughout the year 1875
the bank rate in Paris was uniformly 3 per cent. In
Berlin (Preussische Bank, which preceded the Reichs
Bank) it varied from 4 to 6 per cent. A similar
difference is reflected by the fact that, between the
years 1872 and 1877, the deposits in the State savings
banks in Germany actually fell by roughly 20 per
cent., while in the same period the French deposits
<i>increased</i> about 20 per cent.</p>
<p>Two tendencies plainly show the condition of Germany
during the decade which followed the war: the
enormous growth of Socialism—relatively much
greater than any which we have ever since seen—and
the immense stimulus given to emigration.</p>
<p>Perhaps no thesis is commoner with the defender
of war than this: that, though one may not be able
in a narrow economic sense to justify an enterprise
like that of 1870, the moral stimulus which victory
gave to the German people is accepted as being of
incalculable benefit to the race and the nation. Its
alleged effect in bringing about a national solidarity,
in stimulating patriotic sentiment and national pride,
in the wiping out of internal differences and Heaven
knows what, are claims I have dealt with at greater
length elsewhere, and I wish only to note here that
all this high-falutin does not stand the test of facts.
The two phenomena just mentioned—the extraordinary
progress of Socialism and the enormous stimulus
given to emigration during the years which
immediately followed the war—give the lie to all
the claims in question. In 1872-73, the very years
in which the moral stimulus of victory and the economic
stimulus of the indemnity should have kept at
home every able-bodied German, emigration was,
relatively to the population, greater than it has ever
been before or since, the figures for 1872 being 154,000
and for 1873 134,000.<a id="FNanchor_24_24"/><a href="#Footnote_24_24">[24]</a> And at no period since the
fifties was the internal political struggle so bitter—it
was a period of repression, of prescription on the
one side and class-hatred on the other—"the golden
age of the drill-sergeant," some German has called it.</p>
<p>It will be replied that, after the first decade, Germany's
trade has shown an expansion which has not
been shown by that of France. Those who are
hypnotized by this, quietly ignore altogether one
great fact or which has affected both France and Germany,
not only since the war, but during the whole
of the nineteenth century, and that factor is that the
population of France, from causes in no way connected
with the Franco-Prussian War, since the
tendency was a pronounced one for fifty years before,
is practically quite stationary; while the population
of Germany, also for reasons in no way connected
with the war, since the tendency was also pronounced
half a century previously, has shown an abounding
expansion. Since 1875 the population of Germany
has increased by twenty million souls. That of
France has not increased at all. Is it astonishing
that the labor of twenty million souls makes some
stir in the industrial world? Is it not evident that
the necessity of earning a livelihood for this increasing
population gives to German industry an expansion
outside the limits of her territory which cannot
be looked for in the case of a nation whose social
energies are not faced with any such problem? There
is this, moreover, to be borne in mind: Germany has
secured her foreign trade on what are, in the terms
of the relative comfort of her people, hard conditions.
In other words, she has secured that trade by cutting
profits, in the way that a business fighting desperately
for life will cut profits, in order to secure orders,
and by making sacrifices that the comfortable business
man will not make. Notwithstanding the fact
that France has made no sensational splash in foreign
trade since the war, the standard of comfort among
her people has been rising steadily, and is without
doubt generally higher to-day than is that of the
German people. This higher standard of comfort is
reflected in her financial situation. It is Germany,
the victor, which is to-day in the position of a suppliant
in regard to France, and it is revealing no
diplomatic secrets to say that, for many years now,
Germany has been employing all the wiles of her diplomacy
to obtain the official recognition of German
securities on the French Bourses. France financially
has, in a very real sense, the whip hand.</p>
<p>That is not all. Those who point triumphantly to
German industrial expansion, as a proof of the benefits
of war and conquest, ignore certain facts which
cannot be ignored if that argument is to have any
value, and they are these:</p>
<p>1. Such progress is not peculiar to Germany; it is
shown in an equal or greater degree (I am speaking
now of the general wealth and social progress of the
average individual citizen) by States that have had
no victorious war—the Scandinavian States, the
Netherlands, Switzerland.</p>
<p>2. Even if it were special to Germany, which it
is not, we should be entitled to ask whether certain
developments of German political evolution, which
<i>preceded the war</i>, and which one may fairly claim have
a more direct and understandable bearing upon industrial
progress, are not a much more appreciable
factor in that progress than the war itself—I refer
particularly, of course, to the immense change involved
in the fiscal union of the German States,
which was completed before the Franco-German
War of 1870 had been declared; to say nothing of
such other factors as the invention of the Thomas-Gilchrist
process which enabled the phosphoric iron
ores of Germany, previously useless, to be utilized.</p>
<p>3. The very serious social difficulties (which have,
of course, their economic aspect) that <i>do</i> confront the
German people—the intense class friction, the backwardness
of parliamentary government, the survival
of reactionary political ideas, wrapped up with the
domination of the "Prussian ideal"—all difficulties
which States whose political development has been
less marked by successful war (the lesser European
States just mentioned, for instance)—are not faced
with in the same degree. These difficulties, special,
among the great European nations, to Germany, are
certainly in a large measure a legacy of the Franco-German
War, a part of the general system to which
that war gave rise, the general character of the
political union which it provoked.</p>
<p>The general ascription of such real progress as
Germany has made to the effects of the war and
nothing else—a conclusion which calmly ignores factors
which have evidently a more direct bearing—is
one of those <i>a priori</i> judgments repeated, parrot
fashion, without investigation or care even by publicists
of repute; it is characteristic of the carelessness
which dominates this whole subject. This more
general consideration, which does not properly belong
to the special problem of an indemnity, I have dealt
with at greater length in the next section. The evidence
bearing on the particular question, as to
whether in practice the exaction of a large monetary
indemnity from a conquered foe can ever be economically
profitable or of real advantage to the conqueror,
is of a simpler character. If we put the
question in this form, "Was the receipt of the
indemnity, in the most characteristic and successful
case in history, of advantage to the conqueror?"
the reply is simple enough: all the evidence plainly
and conclusively shows that it was of no advantage;
that the conqueror would probably have been better
without it.</p>
<p>Even if we draw from that evidence a contrary
conclusion, even if we conclude that the actual payment
of the indemnity was as beneficial as all the
evidence would seem to show it was mischievous;
even if we could set aside completely the financial
and commercial difficulties which its payment seems
to have involved; if we ascribe to other causes the
great financial crises which followed that payment;
if we deduct no discount from the nominal value of
the indemnity, but assume that every mark and
thaler of it represented its full face value to Germany—even
admitting all this, it is still inevitable that <i>the
direct cost of preparing for a war and of guarding
against a subsequent war of retribution must, from the
nature of the case, exceed the value of the indemnity
which can be exacted</i>. This is not merely a hypothetical
statement, it is a commercial fact, supported by
evidence which is familiar to us all. In order to avoid
repaying, with interest, the indemnity drawn from
France, Germany has had to expend upon armaments
a sum of money at least equal to that indemnity.
In order to exact a still larger indemnity from
Great Britain, Germany would have to spend a still
larger sum in preparations, and to guard against
repayment would be led into indefinite expenditure,
which has only to go on long enough inevitably to
exceed the very definite indemnity. For, it must be
remembered that the amount of an indemnity extractable
from a modern community, of the credit
era, has very definite limits: an insolvent community
can pay more. If the Statesmen of Europe could lay
on one side, for a moment, the irrelevant considerations
which cloud their minds, they would see that
the direct cost of acquisition by force must in these
circumstances necessarily exceed in value the property
acquired. When the <i>indirect</i> costs are also considered,
the balance of loss becomes incalculably
greater.</p>
<p>Those who urge that through an indemnity, war
can be made to "pay" (and it is for them that this
chapter is written), have before them problems and
difficulties—difficulties of not merely a military, but
of a financial and social character—of the very deepest
kind. It was precisely in this section of the subject
that German science failed in 1870. There is no
evidence that much progress has been made in the
study of this phase of the problem by either side since
the war—indeed, there is plenty of evidence that it
has been neglected. It is time that it was scientifically
and systematically attacked.</p>
<p>Those who wish well for Europe will encourage
the study, for it can have but one result: to show that
less and less can war be made to pay; that all those
forces of our world which daily gain in strength make
it, as a commercial venture, more and more preposterous.
The study of this department of international
polity will tend to the same result as the
study of any of its facets: the undermining of those
beliefs which have in the past so often led to, and are
to-day so often claimed as the motives likely to lead
to, war between civilized peoples.</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VII</h3>
<p>HOW COLONIES ARE OWNED</p>
<blockquote><p>Why twentieth-century methods must differ from eighteenth—The
vagueness of our conceptions of statecraft—How Colonies are
"owned"—Some little recognized facts—Why foreigners could
not fight England for her self-governing Colonies—She does
not "own" them, since they are masters of their own destiny—The
paradox of conquest: England in a worse position
in regard to her own Colonies than in regard to foreign
nations—Her experience as the oldest and most practised
colonizer in history—Recent French experience—Could Germany
hope to do what England cannot do?</p></blockquote>
<p>The foregoing chapters dispose of the first six of the
seven propositions outlined in Chapter III. There
remains the seventh, dealing with the notion that
in some way England's security and prosperity would
be threatened by a foreign nation "taking our
Colonies from us"—a thing which we are assured her
rivals are burning to do, as it would involve the
"breaking up of the British Empire" to their
advantage.</p>
<p>Let us try to read some meaning into a phrase
which, however childish it may appear on analysis,
is very commonly in the mouths of those who are
responsible for British political ideas.</p>
<p>In this connection it is necessary to point out—as,
indeed, it is in every phase of this problem of the
relationship of States—that the world has moved,
that methods have changed. It is hardly possible to
discuss this matter of the necessary futility of military
force in the modern world for ten minutes without
it being urged that as England has acquired her
Colonies by the sword, it is evident that the sword
may do a like service for modern States desiring
Colonies. About as reasonably could one say that,
as certain tribes and nations in the past enriched
themselves by capturing slaves and women among
neighboring tribes, the desire to capture slaves and
women will always be an operative motive in warfare
between nations, as though slavery had not been
put economically out of court by modern industrial
methods, and as though the change in social methods
had not put the forcible capture of women out of
court.</p>
<p>What was the problem confronting the merchant
adventurer of the sixteenth century? There were
newly-discovered foreign lands containing, as he believed,
precious metals and stones and spices, and
inhabited by savages or semi-savages. If other
traders got those stones, it was quite evident that he
could not. His colonial policy, therefore, had to be
directed to two ends: first, such effective political
occupation of the country that he could keep the
savage or semi-savage population in check, and could
exploit the territory for its wealth; and, secondly,
such arrangements as would prevent other nations
from searching for this wealth in precious metals,
spices, etc., since, if they obtained it, he could
not.</p>
<p>That is the story of the French and Dutch in
India, and of the Spanish in South America. But
as soon as there grew up in those countries an organized
community living in the country itself, the
whole problem changed. The Colonies, in this later
stage of development, have a value to the Mother
Country mainly as a market and a source of food and
raw material, and if their value in those respects is to
be developed to the full, they inevitably become self-governing
communities in greater or less degree, and
the Mother Country exploits them exactly as she
exploits any other community with which she may
be trading. Germany might acquire Canada, but it
could no longer be a question of her taking Canada's
wealth in precious metals, or in any other form, to
the exclusion of other nations. Could Germany
"own" Canada, she would have to "own" it in the
same way that Britain does; the Germans would have
to pay for every sack of wheat and every pound of
beef that they might buy, just as though Canada
"belonged" to England or to anybody else. Germany
could not have even the meagre satisfaction of
Germanizing these great communities, for one knows
that they are far too firmly "set." Their language,
law, morals, would have to be, after German conquest,
what they are now. Germany would find that
the German Canada was pretty much the Canada
that it is now—a country where Germans are free to
go and do go; a field for Germany's expanding
population.</p>
<p>As a matter of fact, Germany feeds her expanding
population from territories like Canada and the
United States and South America without sending its
citizens there. The era of emigration from Germany
has stopped, because the compound steam-engine has
rendered emigration largely unnecessary. And it is
the developments which are the necessary outcome of
such forces, that have made the whole colonial
problem of the twentieth century radically different
from that of the eighteenth or seventeenth.</p>
<p>I have stated the case thus: No nation could gain
any advantage by the conquest of the British Colonies,
and Great Britain could not suffer material
damage by their "loss," however much this would be
regretted on sentimental grounds, and as rendering
less easy a certain useful social co-operation between
kindred peoples. For the British Colonies are, in
fact, independent nations in alliance with the Mother
Country, to whom they are no source of tribute or
economic profit (except in the way that foreign
nations are), their economic relations being settled
not by the Mother Country, but by the Colonies.
Economically, England would gain by their formal
separation, since she would be relieved of the cost of
their defence. Their loss, involving, therefore, no
change in economic fact (beyond saving the Mother
Country the cost of their defence), could not involve
the ruin of the Empire and the starvation of the
Mother Country, as those who commonly treat of
such a contingency are apt to aver. As England is
not able to exact tribute or economic advantage, it is
inconceivable that any other country, necessarily less
experienced in colonial management, would be able
to succeed where England had failed, especially in
view of the past history of the Spanish, Portuguese,
French, and British Colonial Empires. This history
also demonstrates that the position of British Crown
Colonies, in the respect which we are considering, is
not sensibly different from that of the self-governing
ones. It is not to be presumed, therefore, that any
European nation would attempt the desperately
expensive business of the conquest of England, for
the purpose of making an experiment with her
Colonies which all colonial history shows to be
doomed to failure.</p>
<p>What are the facts? Great Britain is the most
successful colonizing nation in the world, and the
policy into which her experience has driven her is
that outlined by Sir C.P. Lucas, one of the greatest
authorities on colonial questions. He writes, speaking
of the history of the British Colonies on the
American continent, thus:</p>
<blockquote><p>It was seen—but it might not have been seen had the
United States not won their independence—that English
colonists, like Greek Colonies of old, go out on terms of
being equal, not subordinate, to those who are left
behind; that when they have effectively planted another
and a distant land, they must, within the widest limits,
be left to rule themselves; that, whether they are right,
or whether they are wrong—more, perhaps, when they
are wrong than when they are right—they cannot be
made amenable by force; that mutual good feeling,
community of interest, and abstention from pressing
rightful claims to their logical conclusion, can alone hold
together a true Colonial Empire.</p></blockquote>
<p>But what in the name of common sense is the
advantage of conquering them if the only policy is
to let them do as they like, "whether they are right,
or whether they are wrong—more, perhaps, when
they are wrong than when they are right"? And
what avails it to conquer them if they cannot be
made amenable to force? Surely this makes the
whole thing a <i>reductio ad absurdum</i>. Were a Power
like Germany to use force to conquer Colonies, she
would find out that they were not amenable to
force, and that the only working policy was to let
them do exactly as they did before she conquered
them, and to allow them, if they chose—and many
of the British Colonies do so choose—to treat the
Mother Country absolutely as a foreign country.
There has recently been going on in Canada a discussion
as to the position which that Dominion
should hold with reference to the British in the event
of war, and that discussion has made Canada's
position quite plain. It has been summarized thus:
"We must always be free to give or refuse support."<a id="FNanchor_25_25"/><a href="#Footnote_25_25">[25]</a></p>
<p>Could a foreign nation say more? In what sense
does England "own" Canada when Canadians must
always be free to give or refuse their military support
to England; and in what way does Canada differ from
a foreign nation while England may be at war when
Canada can be at peace? Mr. Asquith formally
endorses this conception.<a id="FNanchor_26_26"/><a href="#Footnote_26_26">[26]</a></p>
<p>This shows clearly that no Dominion is held to be
bound by virtue of its allegiance to the Sovereign of
the British Empire to place its forces at his disposition,
no matter how real may be the emergency. If
it should not desire so to do, it is free to refuse so to
do. This is to convert the British Empire into a
loose alliance of independent Sovereign States, which
are not even bound to help each other in case of war.
The military alliance between Austria and Germany
is far more stringent than the tie which unites, for
purposes of war, the component parts of the British
Empire.</p>
<p>One critic, commenting on this, says:</p>
<blockquote><p>Whatever language is used to describe this new movement
of Imperial defence, it is virtually one more step
towards complete national independence on the part of
the Colonies. For not only will the consciousness of the
assumption of this task of self-defence feed with new
vigor the spirit of nationality, it will entail the further
power of full control over foreign relations. This has
already been virtually admitted in the case of Canada,
now entitled to a determinant voice in all treaties or
other engagements in which her interests are especially
involved. The extension of this right to the other colonial
nations may be taken as a matter of course.
Home rule in national defence thus established reduces
the Imperial connection to its thinnest terms.<a id="FNanchor_27_27"/><a href="#Footnote_27_27">[27]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Still more significant, perhaps, is the following
emphatic declaration from Mr. Balfour himself.
Speaking in London, on November 6, 1911, he said:</p>
<blockquote><p>We depend as an Empire upon the co-operation of
absolutely independent Parliaments. I am not talking
as a lawyer; I am talking as a politician. I believe from
a legal point of view that the British Parliament is
supreme over the Parliament of Canada or Australasia
or the Cape or South Africa, but in fact they are independent
Parliaments, absolutely independent, and it is
our business to recognize that and to frame the British
Empire upon the co-operation of absolutely independent
Parliaments.<a id="FNanchor_28_28"/><a href="#Footnote_28_28">[28]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Which means, of course, that England's position
with regard to Canada or Australia is just England's
position with regard to any other independent State;
that she has no more "ownership" in Australia than
she has in Argentina. Indeed, facts of very recent
English history have established quite incontrovertibly
this ridiculous paradox: England has more influence—that
is to say, a freer opportunity of
enforcing her point of view—with foreign nations
than with her own Colonies. Indeed, does not Sir C.
P. Lucas's statement that "whether they are right or
wrong—still more, perhaps, when they are wrong,"
they must be left alone, necessarily mean that her
position with the Colonies is weaker than her position
with foreign nations? In the present state of international
feeling an English Statesman would never
dream of advocating that she should submit to
foreign nations when they are wrong. Recent history
is illuminating on this point.</p>
<p>What were the larger motives that pushed England
into war with the Dutch Republics? To vindicate
the supremacy of the British race in South
Africa, to enforce British ideals as against Boer ideals,
to secure the rights of British Indians and other
British subjects, to protect the native against Boer
oppression, to take the government of the country
generally from a people whom, at that date, she was
apt to describe as "inherently incapable of civilization."
What, however, is the outcome of spending
a billion and a quarter of dollars upon the accomplishment
of these objects? The present Government
of the Transvaal is in the hands of the Boer
party.<a id="FNanchor_29_29"/><a href="#Footnote_29_29">[29]</a> England has achieved the union of South
Africa in which the Boer element is predominant.
Britain has enforced against the British Indian in the
Transvaal and Natal the same Boer regulations
which were one of her grievances before the war, and
the Houses of Parliament have ratified an Act of
Union in which the Boer attitude with reference to
the native is codified and made permanent. Sir
Charles Dilke, in the debate in the House of Commons
on the South African Bill, made this quite
clear. He said: "The old British principle in South
Africa, as distinct from the Boer principle, in regard
to the treatment of natives, was equal rights for all
civilized men. At the beginning of the South African
War the country was told that one of its main objects,
and certainly that the one predominant factor
in any treaty of peace, would be the assertion of the
British principle as against the Boer principle. Now
the Boer principle dominates throughout the whole
of South Africa." Mr. Asquith, as representing the
British Government, admitted that this was the case,
and that "the opinion of this country is almost
unanimous in objecting to the color bar in the
Union Parliament." He went on to say that "the
opinion of the British Government and the opinion
of the British people must not be allowed to lead to
any interference with a self-governing Colony." So
that, having expended in the conquest of the Transvaal
a greater sum than Germany exacted from
France at the close of the Franco-Prussian War,
England has not even the right to enforce her views
on those whose contrary views were the <i>casus
belli</i>!</p>
<p>A year or two since there was in London a deputation
from the British Indians in the Transvaal pointing
out that the regulations there deprive them of the
ordinary rights of British citizens. The British
Government informed them that the Transvaal
being a self-governing Colony, the Imperial Government
could do nothing for them.<a id="FNanchor_30_30"/><a href="#Footnote_30_30">[30]</a> Now, it will not
be forgotten that, at a time when Britain was quarrelling
with Paul Krüger, one of the liveliest of her
grievances was the treatment of British Indians.
Having conquered Krüger, and now "owning" his
country, do the British themselves act as they were
trying to compel Paul Krüger as a foreign ruler to
act? They do not. They (or rather the responsible
Government of the Colony, with whom they dare not
interfere, although they were ready enough to make
representations to Krüger) simply and purely enforce
his own regulations. Moreover, the Australian Commonwealth
and British Columbia have since taken
the view with reference to British Indians which
President Krüger took, and which view England
made almost a <i>casus belli</i>. Yet in the case of her
Colonies she does absolutely nothing.</p>
<p>So the process is this: The Government of a
foreign territory does something which we ask it to
cease doing. The refusal of the foreign Government
constitutes a <i>casus belli</i>. We fight, we conquer,
and the territory in question becomes one of
our Colonies, and we allow the Government of that
Colony to continue doing the very thing which constituted,
in the case of a foreign nation, a <i>casus
belli</i>.</p>
<p>Do we not, taking the English case as typical,
arrive, therefore, at the absurdity I have already
indicated—<i>that we are in a worse position to enforce
our views in our own territory—that is to say, in our
Colonies—than in foreign territory</i>?</p>
<p>Would England submit tamely if a foreign Government
should exercise permanently gross oppression
on an important section of her citizens?
Certainly she would not. But when the Government
exercising that oppression happens to be the Government
of her own Colonies she does nothing, and a
great British authority lays it down that, even more
when the Colonial Government is wrong than when
it is right, must she do nothing, and that, though
wrong, the Colonial Government cannot be amenable
to force. Nor can it be said that Crown Colonies
differ essentially in this matter from self-governing
dominions. Not only is there an irresistible
tendency for Crown Colonies to acquire the practical
rights of self-governing dominions, but it has become
a practical impossibility to disregard their
special interests. Experience is conclusive on this
point.</p>
<p>I am not here playing with words or attempting to
make paradoxes. This <i>reductio ad absurdum</i>—the
fact that when she owns a territory she renounces the
privilege of using force to ensure observance of her
views—is becoming more and more a commonplace
of British colonial government.</p>
<p>As to the fiscal position of the Colonies, that is
precisely what their political relation is in all but
name; they are foreign nations. They erect tariffs
against Great Britain; they exclude large sections of
British subjects absolutely (practically speaking, no
British Indian is allowed to set foot in Australia, and
yet British India constitutes the greater part of the
British Empire), and even against British subjects
from Great Britain vexatious exclusion laws are
enacted. Again the question arises: Could a foreign
country do more? If fiscal preference is extended to
Great Britain, that preference is not the result of
British "ownership" of the Colonies, but is the free
act of the colonial legislators, and could as well be
made by any foreign nation desiring to court closer
fiscal relations with Great Britain.<a id="FNanchor_31_31"/><a href="#Footnote_31_31">[31]</a></p>
<p>Is it conceivable that Germany, if the real relations
between Great Britain and her Colonies were understood,
would undertake the costliest war of conquest
in history in order to acquire an absurd and profitless
position from which she could not exact even the
shadow of a material advantage?</p>
<p>It may be pleaded that Germany might on the
morrow of conquest attempt to enforce a policy
which gave her a material advantage in the Colonies,
such as Spain and Portugal attempted to create for
themselves. But in that case, is it conceivable that
Germany, without colonial experience, would be able
to enforce a policy which Great Britain was obliged
to abandon a hundred years ago? Is it imaginable
that, if Great Britain has been utterly unable to carry
out a policy by which the Colonies shall pay anything
resembling tribute to the Mother Country, Germany,
without experience, and at an enormous disadvantage
in the matter of language, tradition, racial tie,
and the rest, would be able to make such a policy a
success? Surely, if the elements of this question
were in the least understood in Germany, such a
preposterous notion could not be entertained for a
moment.</p>
<p>Does anyone seriously pretend that the present
system of British Colony-holding is due to British
philanthropy or high-mindedness? We all know, of
course, that it is simply due to the fact that the older
system of exploitation by monopoly broke down. It
was a complete social, commercial, and political
failure long before it was abolished by law. If England
had persisted in the use of force to impose a disadvantageous
situation on the Colonies, she would
have followed in the trail of Spain, Portugal, and
France, and she would have lost her Colonies, and
her Empire would have broken up.</p>
<p>It took England anything from two to three centuries
to learn the real colonial policy, but it would not
take so long in our day for a conqueror to realize the
only situation possible between one great community
and another. European history, indeed, has
recently furnished a striking illustration of how the
forces which compel the relationship, which England
has adopted towards her Colonies, are operative,
even in the case of quite small Colonies, which could
not be termed "great communities." Under the
Méline régime in France, less than twenty years ago,
a highly Protectionist policy, somewhat corresponding
to the old English colonial monopoly system, was
enforced in the case of certain French Colonies.
None of these Colonies was very considerable—indeed,
they were all quite small—and yet the forces
which they represented in the matter of the life of
France have sufficed to change radically the attitude
of the French Government in the matter of the policy
which less than twenty years ago was imposed on
them. In <i>Le Temps</i> of April 5, 1911, appeared the
following:</p>
<blockquote><p>Our Colonies can consider yesterday a red-letter day.
The debate in the Chamber gives hope that the stifling
fiscal policy imposed on them heretofore is about to be
very greatly modified. The Tariff Commission of the
Chamber has hitherto been a very citadel of the blindest
type of Protectionism in this matter. M. Thierry is the
present President of this Commission, and yet it is from
him that we learn that a new era in the Colonies is about
to be inaugurated. It is a very great change, and one that
may have incalculable consequences in the future development
of our Colonial Empire.</p>
<p>The Customs Law of 1892 committed two injustices
with regard to our possessions. The first was that it
obliged the Colonies to receive, free of duty, goods coming
from France, while it taxed colonial goods coming
into France. Now, it is impossible to imagine a treaty
of that kind being passed between two free countries, and
if it was passed with the Colonies, it was because these
Colonies were weak, and not in the position to defend
themselves <i>vis-à-vis</i> the Mother Country.... The
Minister of the Colonies himself, animated by a newer
and better spirit, which we are so happy to see appear in
our treatment of colonial questions, has promised to give
all his efforts towards terminating the present bad
system.</p>
<p>A further defect of the law of 1892 is that all the
Colonies have been subjected to the same fiscal arrangement,
as though there could be anything in common
between countries separated by the width of the whole
globe. Happily the policy was too outrageous ever to be
put into full execution. Certain of our African Colonies<a id="FNanchor_32_32"/><a href="#Footnote_32_32">[32]</a>
were tied by international treaties at the time that the
law was voted, so that the Government was compelled
to make exceptions. But Monsieur Méline's idea at this
period was to bring all the Colonies under one fiscal
arrangement imposed by the Mother Country, just as
soon as the international treaty should have expired.
The exceptions have thus furnished a most useful
demonstration as to the results which flow from the two
systems; the fiscal policy imposed by the Mother Country
in view merely of its own immediate interest, and the
fiscal policy framed to some extent by the Colony in view
of its own special interests. Well, what is the result?
It is this. That those Colonies which have been free to
frame their own fiscal policy have enjoyed undeniable
prosperity, while those which have been obliged to submit
to the policy imposed by another country have
been sinking into a condition of veritable ruin; they are
faced by positive disaster! Only one conclusion is
possible. Each Colony must be free to make those
arrangements which in its view are suited to its local
conditions. That is not at all what M. Méline desired,
but it is what experience imposes.... It is not
merely a matter of injustice. Our policy has been
absurd. What is it that France desires in her Colonies?
An addition of wealth and power to the Mother Country.
But if we compel the Colonies to submit to disadvantageous
fiscal arrangements, which result in their poverty,
how can they possibly be a source of wealth and power
to the Mother Country? A Colony which can sell
nothing is a Colony which can buy nothing: it is a customer
lost to French industry.</p></blockquote>
<p>Every feature of the foregoing is significant and
pregnant: this change of policy is not taking place
because France is unable to impose force—she is perfectly
able to do so; speaking in practical terms, the
Colonies have no physical force whatever to oppose
to her—but this change is taking place because the
imposition of force, even when completely successful
and unchallenged, is economically futile.
The object at which France is striving can be obtained
in one way only: by an arrangement which
is mutually advantageous, arrived at by the free
consent of both parties, the establishment of a relationship
which places a Colony fiscally, economically,
on the footing of a foreign country. France is
now in process of doing exactly what England has
done in the case of her Colonies: she is undoing the
work of conquest, surrendering bit by bit the
right to impose force, because force fails in its
object.</p>
<p>Perhaps the most significant feature of all in the
French experience is this: that it has taken less than
twenty years for the old colonial system, even in the
case of small and relatively powerless Colonies, to
break down entirely. How long would a Power like
Germany be able to impose the old policy of exploitation
on great and powerful communities, a hundred
times greater than the French Colonies, even supposing
that she could ever "conquer" them?<a id="FNanchor_33_33"/><a href="#Footnote_33_33">[33]</a></p>
<p>Yet so little is the real relationship of modern
Colonies understood, that I have heard it mentioned
in private conversation by an English public man,
whose position was such, moreover, as to enable him
to give very great effect to his opinion, that one of
the motives pushing Germany to war was the projected
capture of South Africa, in order to seize the
gold-mines, and by means of a tax of 50 per cent. on
their output, secure for herself one of the chief
sources of gold in the world.</p>
<p>One heard a good deal at the outbreak of the South
African War of the part that the gold-mines played
in precipitating that conflict. Alike in England and
on the Continent, it was generally assumed that
Great Britain was "after the gold-mines." A long
correspondence took place in the London <i>Times</i> as
to the real value of the mines, and speculation as to
the amount of money which it was worth Great
Britain's while to spend in their "capture." Well,
now that England has won the war, how many gold-mines
has she captured? In other words, how many
shares in the gold-mines does the British Government
hold? How many mines have been transferred from
their then owners to the British Government, as the
result of British victory? How much tribute does
the Government of Westminster exact as the result
of investing two hundred and fifty millions in the
enterprise?</p>
<p>The fact is, of course, that the British Government
does not hold a cent's worth of the property.
The mines belong to the shareholders and to no one
else, and in the conditions of the modern world it is
not possible for a Government to "capture" so much
as a single dollar's worth of such property as the
result of a war of conquest.</p>
<p>Supposing that Germany or any other conqueror
were to put on the output of the mines a duty of 50
per cent. What would she get, and what would be
the result? The output of the South African mines
to-day is, roughly, $150,000,000 a year, so that she
would get about $75,000,000 a year.<a id="FNanchor_34_34"/><a href="#Footnote_34_34">[34]</a> The annual
total income of Germany is calculated at something
like $15,000,000,000, so that a tribute of $75,000,000
would hold about the same proportion to Germany's
total income that, say, fifteen cents a day would to a
man in receipt of $10,000 a year. It would represent,
say, the expenditure of a man with an income of $2000
or $2500 a year upon, say, his evening cigars. Could
one imagine such a householder in his right mind
committing burglary and murder in order to economize
a dollar a week? Yet that would be the position
of the German Empire entering upon a great and
costly war for the purpose of exacting $75,000,000
a year from the South African mines; or, rather, the
situation for the German Empire would be a great
deal worse than that. For this householder having
committed burglary and murder for the sake of his
dollar a week (the German Empire, that is, having
entered into one of the most frightful wars of history
to exact its tribute of seventy-five millions) would
then find that in order to get this dollar he had to
jeopardize many of the investments upon which the
bulk of his income depended. On the morrow of
imposing a tax of fifty per cent. on the mines there
would be such a slump in a class of security now dealt
in by every considerable stock exchange in the world
that there would hardly be a considerable business
firm in Europe unaffected thereby. In England,
they know of the difficulty that a relatively mild
fiscal attack, delivered rather for social and moral
than economic reasons, upon a class of property like
the brewing trade provokes. What sort of outcry,
therefore, would be raised throughout the world
when every South African mining share in the world
lost at one stroke half its value, and a great many of
them lost all their value? Who would invest money
in the Transvaal at all if property were to be subject
to that sort of shock? Investors would argue that
though it be mines to-day, it might be other forms of
property to-morrow, and South Africa would find
herself in the position of being able hardly to borrow
a quarter for any purpose whatsoever, save at
usurious and extortionate rates of interest. The
whole of South African trade and industry would, of
course, feel the effect, and South Africa as a market
would immediately begin to dwindle in importance.
Those businesses bound up with South African affairs
would border on the brink of ruin, and many of them
topple over. Is that the way efficient Germany
would set about the development of her newly-acquired
Empire? She would soon find that she had
a ruined Colony on her hands. If in South Africa
the sturdy Dutch and English stock did not produce
a George Washington with a better material and
moral case for independence than George Washington
ever had, then history has no meaning. If it
costs England a billion and a quarter to conquer
Dutch South Africa, what would it cost Germany to
conquer Anglo-Dutch South Africa? Such a policy
could not, of course, last six months, and Germany
would end by doing what Great Britain has ended by
doing—she would renounce all attempt to exact a
tribute or commercial advantage other than that
which is the result of free co-operation with the
South African people. In other words, she would
learn that the policy which Great Britain has adopted
was not adopted by philanthropy, but in the hard
school of bitter experience. Germany would see that
the last word in colonial statesmanship is to exact
nothing from your Colonies, and where the greatest
colonial power of history has been unable to follow
any other policy, a poor intruder in the art of colonial
administration would not be likely to prove more
successful, and she, too, would find that the only way
to treat Colonies is to treat them as independent or
foreign territories, and the only way to own them is
to make no attempt at exercising any of the functions
of ownership. All the reasons which gave force to
this principle in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries have been reinforced a hundredfold by the
modern contrivances of credit and capital, quick
communication, popular government, popular press,
the conditions and cost of warfare—the whole weight,
indeed, of modern progress. It is not a question here
of theorizing, of the erection of an elaborate thesis,
nor is it a question of arguing what the relations of
Colonies ought to be. The differences between the
Imperialist and the Anti-imperialist do not enter
into the discussion at all. It is simply a question
of what the unmistakable outstanding facts of experience
have taught, and we all know, Imperialists
and their opponents alike, that whatever the relations
with the Colonies are to be, that relationship must
be fixed by the free consent of the Colonies, by their
choice, not ours. Sir J.R. Seeley notes in his book,
"The Expansion of England," that because the early
Spanish Colonies were in a true sense of the word
"possessions," Britons acquired the habit of talking
of "possessions" and "ownership," and their ideas
of colonial policy were vitiated during three centuries,
simply by the fatal hypnotism of an incorrect word.
Is it not time that we shook off the influence of those
disastrous words? Canada, Australia, New Zealand,
and South Africa, are not "possessions." They are
no more possessions than is Argentina or Brazil, and
the nation which conquered England, which even
captured London, would be hardly nearer to the
conquest of Canada or Australia than if it happened
to occupy Constantinople or St. Petersburg. Why,
therefore, do we tolerate the loose talk which assumes
that the master of London is also master of Montreal,
Vancouver, Cape Town, Johannesburg, Melbourne,
and Sydney? Have we not had about enough of this
ignorant chatter, which is persistently blind to the
simplest and most elementary facts of the case?
And have not the English, of all people of the world,
a most direct interest in aiding the general realization
of these truths in Europe? Would not that general
realization add immensely to the security of their
so-called Empire?</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VIII</h3>
<p>THE FIGHT FOR "THE PLACE IN THE SUN"</p>
<blockquote><p>How Germany really expands—Where her real Colonies are—How
she exploits without conquest—What is the difference between
an army and a police force?—The policing of the world—Germany's
share of it in the Near East.</p></blockquote>
<p>What is the practical outcome of the situation
which the facts detailed in the last chapter make
plain? Must nations like Germany conclude that,
because there can be no duplication of the fight for
empty territory which took place between European
nations in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
and because talk of the German conquest of British
Colonies is childish nonsense, Germany must therefore
definitely surrender any hope of expansion, and
accept a secondary position because she happens to
have "come too late into the world"? Are Germans
with all their activities and scientific thoroughness,
and with such a lively sense of the difficulty of
finding room in the world for the additional million
of Germans every year quietly to accept the <i>status
quo</i>?</p>
<p>If our thoughts were not so distorted by misleading
political imagery, it is doubtful whether it would ever
occur to us that such a "problem" existed.</p>
<p>When one nation, say England, occupies a territory,
does it mean that that territory is "lost" to Germans?
We know this to be an absurdity. Germany does
an enormous and increasing trade with the territory
that has been pre-empted by the Anglo-Saxon race.
Millions of Germans in Germany gain their livelihood
by virtue of German enterprise and German industry
in Anglo-Saxon countries—indeed, it is the bitter
and growing complaint of Englishmen that they are
being driven out of these territories by the Germans;
that where originally British shipping was universal
in the East,<a id="FNanchor_35_35"/><a href="#Footnote_35_35">[35]</a> German shipping is now coming to
occupy the prominent place; that the trade of whole
territories which Englishmen originally had to
themselves is now being captured by Germans, and
this not merely where the fiscal arrangements are
more or less under the control of the British Government,
as in the Crown Colonies, but in those territories
originally British but now independent, like
the United States, as well as in those territories
which are in reality independent, though nominally
still under British control, like Australia and Canada.</p>
<p>Moreover, why need Germany occupy the extraordinary
position of phantom "ownership," which
England occupies, in order to enjoy all the real benefits
which in our day result from a Colonial Empire?
More Germans have found homes in the United
States in the last half-century than have Englishmen
in all their Colonies. It is calculated that between
ten and twelve millions of the population of the
United States are of direct German descent It is
true, of course, that Germans do not live under their
flag, but it is equally true that they do not regret
that fact, but rejoice in it! The majority of German
emigrants do not desire that the land to which they
go shall have the political character of the land which
they leave behind. The fact that in adopting the
United States they have shed something of the German
tradition and created a new national type, partaking
in part of the English and in part of the
German, is, on the whole, very much to their advantage—and
incidentally to ours.</p>
<p>Of course it is urged that, despite all this, the
national sentiment will always desire, for the overflow
of its population, territories in which that nation's
language, law, and literature reign. But how far is
that aspiration one of those purely political aspirations
still persisting, it is true, but really the result
of the momentum of old ideas, the outcome of
facts long since passed away, and destined to disappear
as soon as the real facts have been absorbed
by the general public?</p>
<p>Thus a German will shout patriotically, and, if
needs be, embroil his country in a war for an equatorial
or Asiatic colony; the truth being that he
does not think about the matter seriously. But if
he and his family have to emigrate, he <i>does</i> think
about it seriously, and then it is another matter;
he does not choose Equatorial Africa or China; he
goes to the United States, which he knows to be a
far better country in which to make his home than
the Cameroons or Kiau Chau could ever be. Indeed,
in England's own case, are not certain foreign
countries much more her real colonies for her children
of the future than certain territory under her own
flag? Will not her children find better and more
congenial conditions, more readily build real homes,
in Pennsylvania, which is "foreign," than in Bombay,
which is "British"?</p>
<p>Of course, if by sheer military conquest it were
possible to turn a United States or even a Canada
into a real Germany—of German language, law,
literature—the matter would assume another aspect.
But the facts dealt with in the last chapter show that
the day is past for conquest in that form. Quite
other means must be employed. The German conqueror
of the future would have to say with Napoleon:
"I come too late. The nations are too firmly
set." Even when the English, the greatest colonizers
of the world, conquer a territory like the
Transvaal or the Orange Free State, they have no
resort, having conquered it, but to allow its own
law, its own literature, its own language to have free
play, just as though the conquest had never taken
place. This was even the case with Quebec more
than one hundred years ago, and Germany will have
to be guided by a like rule. On the morrow of conquest
she would have to proceed to establish her real
ascendancy by other than military means—a thing
she is free to do to-day, if she can. It cannot
throughout this discussion be too often repeated that
the world has been modified, and that what was possible
to the Canaanites and the Romans, and even to
the Normans, is no longer possible to us. The edict
can no longer go forth to "slay every male child"
that is born into the conquered territory, in order that
the race may be exterminated. Conquest in this sense
is impossible. The most marvellous colonial history
in the world—British colonial history—demonstrates
that in this field physical force is no longer of avail.</p>
<p>And Germans are beginning to realize it. "We
must resign ourselves in all clearness and calm to the
fact that there is no possibility of acquiring Colonies
suitable for emigration," writes Dr. P. Rohrbach.
He continues:</p>
<blockquote><p>But if we cannot have such Colonies, it by no means
follows that we cannot obtain the advantages, if only to a
limited extent, which make these Colonies desirable. It is
a mistake to regard the mere possession of extensive
trans-oceanic territories, even when they are able to
absorb a part of the national surplus of population, as
necessarily a direct increase of power. Australia, Canada,
and South Africa do not increase the power of the British
Empire because they are British possessions, nor yet
because they are peopled by a few million British emigrants
and their descendants, but because by trade with
them the wealth and with it the defensive strength of the
Mother Country are increased. Colonies which do not
produce that result have but little value; and countries
which possess this importance for a nation, even though
they are not its Colonies, are in this decisive point a
substitute for colonial possessions in the ordinary sense.<a id="FNanchor_36_36"/><a href="#Footnote_36_36">[36]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>In fact the misleading political imagery to which I
referred a few pages back has gone far to destroy our
sense of reality and sense of proportion in the matter
of political control of foreign territory, a fact which
the diplomatic turmoil of 1911 most certainly
illustrated. I had occasion at the time to emphasize
it in the following terms:</p>
<blockquote><p>The Press of Europe and America is very busy discussing
the lessons of the diplomatic conflict which has
just ended, and the military conflict which has just
begun. And the outstanding impression which one
gets from most of these essays in high politics—whether
French, Italian, or British—is that we have been and
still are witnessing part of a great world movement, the
setting in motion of Titanic forces "deep-set in primordial
needs and impulses."</p>
<p>For months those in the secrets of the Chancelleries
have spoken with bated breath—as though in the
presence of some vision of Armageddon. On the strength
of this mere talk of war by the three nations, vast
commerical interests have been embarrassed, fortunes
have been lost and won on the Bourses, banks have suspended
payment, some thousands have been ruined;
while the fact that the fourth and fifth nations have
actually gone to war has raised all sorts of further possibilities
of conflict, not alone in Europe, but in Asia,
with remoter danger of religious fanaticism and all
its sequelæ. International bitterness and suspicion in
general have been intensified, and the one certain result
of the whole thing is that immense burdens will be added
in the shape of further taxation for armaments to the
already heavy ones carried by the five or six nations
concerned. For two or three hundred millions of people
in Europe, life, which with all the problems of high prices,
labor wars, unsolved social difficulties, is none too easy
as it is, will be made harder still.</p>
<p>The needs, therefore, that can have provoked a conflict
of these dimensions must be "primordial" indeed. In fact
one authority assures us that what we have seen going on
is "the struggle for life among men"—that struggle which
has its parallel in the whole of sentient existence.</p>
<p>Well, I put it to you, as a matter worth just a moment
or two of consideration, that this conflict is about nothing
of the sort; that it is about a perfectly futile matter, one
which the immense majority of the German, English,
French, Italian, and Turkish people could afford to treat
with the completest indifference. For, to the vast majority
of these 250,000,000 people more or less, it does
not matter two straws whether Morocco or some vague
African swamp near the Equator is administered by
German, French, Italian, or Turkish officials, so long as
it is well administered. Or rather one should go further:
if French, German, or Italian colonization of the past is
any guide, the nation which wins in the contest for territory
of this sort has added a wealth-draining incubus.</p>
<p>This, of course, is preposterous; I am losing sight of
the need for making provision for the future expansion
of the race, for each party to "find its place in the sun";
and Heaven knows what!</p></blockquote>
<p>The European Press was full of these phrases at the
time, and I attempted to weigh their real meaning
by a comparison of French and German history in
the matter of national "expansion" during the last
thirty or forty years.</p>
<blockquote><p>France has got a new empire, we are told; she has won
a great victory; she is growing and expanding and is
richer by something which her rivals are the poorer for
not having.</p>
<p>Let us assume that she makes the same success of
Morocco that she has made of her other possessions, of,
say, Tunis, which represents one of the most successful
of those operations of colonial expansion which have
marked her history during the last forty years. What
has been the precise effect on French prosperity?</p>
<p>In thirty years, at a cost of many millions (it is part
of successful colonial administration in France never to
let it be known what the Colonies really cost), France has
founded in Tunis a Colony, in which to-day there are,
excluding soldiers and officials, about 25,000 genuine
French colonists; just the number by which the French
population in France—the real France—is diminishing
every year! And the value of Tunis as a market does not
even amount to the sum which France spends directly
on its occupation and administration, to say nothing
of the indirect extension of military burdens which its
conquest involved; and, of course, the market which it
represents would still exist in some form, though England—or
even Germany—administered the country.</p>
<p>In other words, France loses every year in her home
population a Colony equivalent to Tunis—if we measure
Colonies in terms of communities made up of the race
which has sprung from the Mother Country. And yet,
if once in a generation her rulers and diplomats can point
to 25,000 Frenchmen living artificially and exotically
under conditions which must in the long-run be inimical
to their race, it is pointed to as "expansion" and as
evidence that France is maintaining her position as a
Great Power. In a few years, as history goes, unless there
is some complete change in tendencies, which at present
seem as strong as ever, the French race, as we know it,
will have ceased to exist, swamped without the firing,
may be, of a single shot, by the Germans, Belgians,
English, Italians, and Jews. There are to-day more
Germans in France than there are Frenchmen in all the
Colonies that France has acquired in the last half-century,
and German trade with France outweighs enormously
the trade of France with all French Colonies. France is
to-day a better Colony for the Germans than they could
make of any exotic Colony which France owns.</p>
<p>"They <i>tell</i> me," said a French Deputy recently (in a
not quite original <i>mot</i>), "that the Germans are at Agadir.
I <i>know</i> they are in the Champs-Elysées." Which, of
course, is in reality a much more serious matter.</p>
<p>On the other side we are to assume that Germany has
during the period of France's expansion,—since the war—not
expanded at all. That she has been throttled and
cramped—that she has not had her place in the sun; and
that is why she must fight for it and endanger the security
of her neighbors.</p>
<p>Well, I put it to you again that all this in reality is
false: that Germany has not been cramped or throttled;
that, on the contrary, as we recognize when we get away
from the mirage of the map, her expansion has been the
wonder of the world. She has added twenty millions
to her population—one-half the present population of
France—during a period in which the French population
has actually diminished. Of all the nations in Europe,
she has cut the biggest slice in the development of world
trade, industry, and influence. Despite the fact that
she has not "expanded" in the sense of mere political
dominion, a proportion of her population, equivalent
to the white population of the whole Colonial British
Empire, make their living, or the best part of it, from the
development and exploitation of territory outside her
borders. These facts are not new, they have been made
the text of thousands of political sermons preached in
England itself during the last few years; but one side of
their significance seems to have been missed.</p>
<p>We get, then, this: On the one side a nation extending
enormously its political dominion, and yet diminishing
in national force—if by national force we mean the
growth of a sturdy, enterprising, vigorous people. (I
am not denying that France is both wealthy and comfortable,
to a greater degree it may be than her rival; but
that is another story.) On the other side, we get immense
expansion expressed in terms of those things—a
growing and vigorous population, and the possibility
of feeding them—and yet the political dominion, speaking
practically, has hardly been extended at all.</p>
<p>Such a condition of things, if the common jargon of
high politics means anything, is preposterous. It takes
nearly all meaning out of most that we hear about
"primordial needs" and the rest of it.</p>
<p>As a matter of fact, we touch here one of the vital
confusions, which is at the bottom of most of the present
political trouble between nations, and shows the power
of the old ideas and the old phraseology.</p>
<p>In the days of the sailing ship and the lumbering
wagon dragging slowly over all but impassable roads, for
one country to derive any considerable profit from another
it had practically to administer it politically. But the
compound steam-engine, the railway, the telegraph, have
profoundly modified the elements of the whole problem.
In the modern world political dominion is playing a more
and more effaced rôle as a factor in commerce; the
non-political factors have in practice made it all but
inoperative. It is the case with every modern nation,
actually, that the outside territories which it exploits
most successfully are precisely those of which it does not
"own" a foot. Even with the most characteristically
colonial of all—Great Britain—the greater part of her
overseas trade is done with countries which she makes no
attempt to "own," control, coerce, or dominate—and
incidentally she has ceased to do any of those things with
her Colonies.</p>
<p>Millions of Germans in Prussia and Westphalia derive
profit or make their living out of countries to which their
political dominion in no way extends. The modern
German exploits South America by remaining at home.
Where, forsaking this principle, he attempts to work
through political power, he approaches futility. German
Colonies are Colonies <i>pour rire</i>. The Government has
to bribe Germans to go to them; her trade with them is
microscopic; and if the twenty millions who have been
added to Germany's population since the war had had to
depend on their country's political conquest, they would
have had to starve. What feeds them are countries
which Germany has never "owned," and never hopes to
"own": Brazil, Argentina, the United States, India,
Australia, Canada, Russia, France, and England. (Germany,
which never spent a mark on its political conquest,
to-day draws more tribute from South America than does
Spain, which has poured out mountains of treasure and
oceans of blood in its conquest.) These are Germany's
real Colonies. Yet the immense interests which they
represent, of really primordial concern to Germany,
without which so many of her people would be actually
without food, are for the diplomats and the soldiers quite
secondary ones; the immense trade which they represent
owes nothing to the diplomat, to Agadir incidents, to
<i>Dreadnoughts</i>: it is the unaided work of the merchant
and the manufacturer. All this diplomatic and military
conflict and rivalry, this waste of wealth, the
unspeakable foulness which Tripoli is revealing, are
reserved for things which both sides to the quarrel could
sacrifice, not merely without loss, but with profit. And
Italy, whose statesmen have been faithful to all the old
"axioms" (Heaven save the mark!) will discover it
rapidly enough. Even her defenders are ceasing now
to urge that she can possibly derive any real benefit
from this colossal ineptitude.</p>
<p>Is it not time that the man in the street—verily, I
believe, less deluded by diplomatic jargon than his
betters, less the slave of an obsolete phraseology—insisted
that the experts in the high places acquired some sense
of the reality of things, of proportions, some sense of
figures, a little knowledge of industrial history, of the
real processes of human co-operation?</p></blockquote>
<p>But are we to assume that the extension of a
European nation's authority overseas can never be
worth while; or that it could, or should, never be the
occasion for conflict between nations; or that the
rôle of, say, England in India or Egypt, is neither
useful nor profitable?</p>
<p>In the second part of this book I have attempted
to uncover the general principle—which sadly needs
establishing in politics—serving to indicate clearly
the advantageous and disadvantageous employment
of force. Because force plays an undoubted rôle
in human development and co-operation, it is sweepingly
concluded that military force and the struggle
between groups must always be a normal feature
of human society.</p>
<p>To a critic, who maintained that the armies of
the world were necessary and justifiable on the same
grounds as the police forces of the world ("Even in
communities such as London, where, in our civic
capacity, we have nearly realized all your ideals,
we still maintain and are constantly improving our
police force"), I replied:</p>
<blockquote><p>When we learn that London, instead of using its
police for the running in of burglars and "drunks," is
using them to lead an attack on Birmingham for the
purpose of capturing that city as part of a policy of
"municipal expansion," or "Civic Imperialism," or
"Pan-Londonism," or what not; or is using its force to
repel an attack by the Birmingham police acting as the
result of a similar policy on the part of the Birmingham
patriots—when that happens you can safely approximate
a police force to a European army. But until it does,
it is quite evident that the two—the army and the police
force—have in reality diametrically opposed rôles.
The police exist as an instrument of social co-operation;
the armies as the natural outcome of the quaint illusion
that though one city could never enrich itself by "capturing"
or "subjugating" another, in some unexplained
way one country can enrich itself by capturing or subjugating
another.</p></blockquote>
<p>In the existing condition of things in England this
illustration covers the whole case; the citizens of
London would have no imaginable interest in "conquering"
Birmingham, or <i>vice versa</i>. But suppose
there arose in the cities of the North such a condition
of disorder that London could not carry on its
ordinary work and trade; then London, if it had the
power, <i>would</i> have an interest in sending its police
into Birmingham, presuming that this could be done.
The citizens of London would have a tangible interest
in the maintenance of order in the North—they
would be the richer for it.</p>
<p>Order was just as well maintained in Alsace-Lorraine
before the German conquest as it was after,
and for that reason Germany has not benefited by
the conquest. But order was not maintained in
California, and would not have been as well maintained
under Mexican as under American rule, and
for that reason America has benefited by the conquest
of California. France has benefited by the conquest
of Algeria, England by that of India, because in each
case the arms were employed not, properly speaking,
for conquest at all, but for police purposes, for the
establishment and maintenance of order; and, so
far as they achieved that object, their rôle was a
useful one.</p>
<p>How does this distinction affect the practical
problem under discussion? Most fundamentally.
Germany has no need to maintain order in England,
nor England in Germany, and the latent struggle
therefore between these two countries is futile. It
is not the result of any inherent necessity of either
people; it is the result merely of that woeful confusion
which dominates statecraft to-day, and it is
bound, so soon as that confusion is cleared up, to
come to an end.</p>
<p>Where the condition of a territory is such that the
social and economic co-operation of other countries
with it is impossible, we may expect the intervention
of military force, not as the result of the "annexationist
illusion," but as the outcome of real social forces
pushing to the maintenance of order. That is the
story of England in Egypt, or, for that matter, in
India. But foreign nations have no need to maintain
order in the British Colonies, nor in the United States;
and though there might be some such necessity in
the case of countries like Venezuela, the last few years
have taught us that by bringing these countries into
the great economic currents of the world, and so setting
up in them a whole body of interests in favor of
order, more can be done than by forcible conquest.
We occasionally hear rumors of German designs in
Brazil and elsewhere, but even the modicum of education
possessed by the average European statesman
makes it plain to him that these nations are, like
the others, "too firmly set" for military occupation
and conquest by an alien people.</p>
<p>It is one of the humors of the whole Anglo-German
conflict that so much has the British public been concerned
with the myths and bogies of the matter that
it seems calmly to have ignored the realities. While
even the wildest Pan-German has never cast his
eyes in the direction of Canada, he has cast them, and
does cast them, in the direction of Asia Minor; and
the political activities of Germany may centre on
that area, for precisely the reasons which result from
the distinction between policing and conquest, which
I have drawn. German industry is coming to have
dominating interests in the Near East, and as those
interests—her markets and investments—increase,
the necessity for better order in, and the better
organization of, those territories increases in corresponding
degree. Germany may need to police
Asia Minor.</p>
<p>What interest have we in attempting to prevent
her? It may be urged that she would close the
markets of those territories against us. But even
if she attempted it, which she is never likely to do,
a Protectionist Asia Minor organized with German
efficiency would be better from the point of view of
trade than a Free Trade Asia Minor organized <i>à la
Turque</i>. Protectionist Germany is one of the best
markets in Europe. If a second Germany were
created in the Near East, if Turkey had a population
with the German purchasing power and the German
tariff, the markets would be worth some two hundred
to two hundred and fifty millions instead of some
fifty to seventy-five. Why should we try to prevent
Germany increasing our trade?</p>
<p>It is true that we touch here the whole problem of
the fight for the open door in the undeveloped territories.
But the real difficulty in this problem is not
the open door at all, but the fact that Germany is
beating England—or England fears she is beating
her in those territories where she has the same tariff
to meet that Germany has, or even a smaller one;
and that she is even beating England in the territories
that the English already "own"—in their
Colonies, in the East, in India. How, therefore,
would England's final crushing of Germany in the
military sense change anything? Suppose England
crushed her so completely that she "owned" Asia
Minor and Persia as completely as she owns India
or Hong Kong, would not the German merchant
continue to beat her even then, as he is beating her
now, in that part of the East over which she already
holds political sway? Again, how would the disappearance
of the German navy affect the problem
one way or the other?</p>
<p>Moreover, in this talk of the open door in the
undeveloped territories, we again seem to lose all our
sense of proportion. English trade is in relative
importance first with the great nations—the United
States, France, Germany, Argentina, South America
generally—after that with the white Colonies; after
that with the organized East; and last of all, and to
a very small extent, with the countries concerned in
this squabble for the open door—territories in which
the trade really is so small as hardly to pay for the
making and upkeep of a dozen battleships.</p>
<p>When the man in the street, or, for that matter,
the journalistic pundit, talks commercial diplomacy,
his arithmetic seems to fall from him. Some years
since the question of the relative position of the three
Powers in Samoa exercised the minds of these wiseacres,
who got fearfully warlike both in England
and in the United States. Yet the trade of the whole
island is not worth that of an obscure Massachusetts
village, and the notion that naval budgets should be
increased to "maintain our position," the notion that
either of the countries concerned should really think
it worth while to build so much as a single battleship
the more for such a purpose, is not throwing away
a sprat to catch a whale, but throwing away a whale
to catch a sprat—and then not catching it. For
even when you <i>have</i> the predominant political
position, even when you <i>have</i> got your extra <i>Dreadnought</i>
or extra dozen <i>Dreadnoughts</i>, it is the more
efficiently organized nation on the commercial side
that will take the trade. And while England is
getting excited over the trade of territories that
matter very little, rivals, including Germany, will
be quietly walking off with the trade that <i>does</i> matter,
will be increasing their hold upon such markets as
the United States, Argentina, South America, and
the lesser Continental States.</p>
<p>If we really examined these questions without the
old meaningless prepossessions, we should see that
it is more to the general interest to have an orderly
and organized Asia Minor under German tutelage
than to have an unorganized and disorderly one
which should be independent. Perhaps it would be
best of all that Great Britain should do the organizing,
or share it with Germany, though England has
her hands full in that respect—Egypt and India are
problems enough. Why should England forbid Germany
to do in a small degree what she has done in a
large degree? Sir Harry H. Johnston, in the <i>Nineteenth
Century</i> for December, 1910, comes a great deal
nearer to touching the real kernel of the problem
that is preoccupying Germany than any of the writers
on the Anglo-German conflict of whom I know.
As the result of careful investigation, he admits that
Germany's real objective is not, properly speaking,
England or England's Colonies at all, but the undeveloped
lands of the Balkan Peninsula, Asia Minor,
Mesopotamia, down even to the mouth of the Euphrates.
He adds that the best informed Germans
use this language to him:</p>
<blockquote><p>In regard to England, we would recall a phrase dropped
by ex-President Roosevelt at an important public speech
in London, a phrase which for some reason was not reported
by the London Press. Roosevelt said that the
best guarantee for Great Britain on the Nile is the presence
of Germany on the Euphrates. Putting aside the
usual hypocrisies of the Teutonic peoples, you know that
this is so. You know that we ought to make common
cause in our dealing with the backward races of the world.
Let Britain and Germany once come to an agreement
in regard to the question of the Near East, and the
world can scarcely again be disturbed by any great war
in any part of the globe, if such a war is contrary to the
interests of the two Empires.</p></blockquote>
<p>Such, declares Sir Harry, is German opinion.
And in all human probability, so far as sixty-five
million people can be said to have the same opinion,
he is absolutely right.</p>
<p>It is because the work of policing backward or
disorderly populations is so often confused with the
annexationist illusion that the danger of squabbles in
the matter is a real one. Not the fact that England
is doing a real and useful work for the world at large
in policing India creates jealousy of her work there,
but the notion that in some way she "possesses"
this territory, and draws tribute and exclusive
advantage therefrom. When Europe is a little more
educated in these matters, the European populations
will realize that they have no primordial interest in
furnishing the policemen. German public opinion
will see that, even if such a thing were possible, the
German people would gain no advantage by replacing
England in India, especially as the final result of the
administrative work of Europe in the Near and Far
East will be to make populations like those of Asia
Minor in the last resort their own policemen. Should
some Power, acting as policeman, ignoring the lessons
of history, try again the experiment tried by Spain
in South America and later by England in North
America, should she try to create for herself exclusive
privileges and monopolies, the other nations have
means of retaliation apart from the military ones—in
the numberless instruments which the economic
and financial relationships of nations furnish.</p>
<h2>PART II</h2>
<p>THE HUMAN NATURE AND MORALS OF THE CASE</p>
<h3>CHAPTER I</h3>
<p>THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CASE FOR WAR</p>
<blockquote><p>The non-economic motives of war—Moral and psychological—The
importance of these pleas—English, German, and American
exponents—The biological plea.</p></blockquote>
<p>Perhaps the commonest plea urged in objection to
the case presented in the first part of this book is
that the real motives of nations in going to war are
not economic at all; that their conflicts arise from
moral causes, using that word in its largest sense;
that they are the outcome of conflicting views of
rights; or that they arise from, not merely non-economic,
but also non-rational causes—from vanity,
rivalry, pride of place, the desire to be first, to occupy
a great situation in the world, to have power or
prestige; from quick resentment of insult or injury;
from temper; the unreasoned desire, which comes
of quarrel or disagreement, to dominate a rival at
all costs; from the "inherent hostility" that exists
between rival nations; from the contagion of sheer
passion, the blind strife of mutually hating men;
and generally because men and nations always have
fought and always will, and because, like the animals
in Watt's doggerel, "it is their nature to."</p>
<p>An expression of the first point of view is embodied
in the criticism of an earlier edition of this book,
in which the critic says:</p>
<blockquote><p>The cause of war is spiritual, not material....
The great wars arose from conflicts as to rights, and the
dangerous causes of war are the existence of antagonistic
ideas of rights or righteousness.... It is for moral
ideas that men are most ready to make sacrifices.<a id="FNanchor_37_37"/><a href="#Footnote_37_37">[37]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>A similar criticism is made by Admiral Mahan.<a id="FNanchor_38_38"/><a href="#Footnote_38_38">[38]</a></p>
<p>In the same way the London <i>Spectator</i> while admitting
the truth of the principles outlined in the first
part of this book, deems that such facts do not
seriously affect the basic cause of war:</p>
<blockquote><p>Just as individuals quarrel among themselves, and
fight as bitterly as the police and the law courts will allow
them, not because they think it will make them rich,
but because their blood is up, and they want to stand up
for what they believe to be their rights, or to revenge
themselves for wrongs done to them, as they think, by
their fellows, so nations will fight, even though it is
demonstrable that they will get no material gain thereby....
They want sometimes freedom, sometimes power.
Sometimes a passion for expansion or dominion comes
over them. Sometimes they seem impelled to fight for
fighting's sake, or, as their leaders and rhetoricians
vaguely say, to fulfil their destinies.... Men fight
sometimes for the love of fighting, sometimes for great
and noble causes, and sometimes for bad causes, but
practically never with an account-book and a balance-sheet
in their hands.</p></blockquote>
<p>I desire to give every possible weight to this plea,
and not to shirk a detail of it, and I think that the
pages that follow cover every one of the points here
raised. But there is a whole school of philosophy
which goes much farther than the <i>Spectator</i>. The
view just cited rather implies that though it is a fact
that men settle their differences by force and passion,
instead of by reason, it is a regrettable fact. But the
school to which I refer urges that men should be
encouraged to fight, and that war is the preferable
solution. War, declare these philosophers, is a
valuable discipline for the nations, and it is not
desirable to see human conflict shifted from the
plane of physical force. They urge that humanity
will be permanently the poorer when, as one of them
has put it, the great struggles of mankind become
merely the struggles of "talk and money-bags."</p>
<p>Parenthetically, it should be pointed out that the
matter has a good deal more than academic interest.
This philosophy constitutes a constant element of
resistance to that reform of political thought and
tradition in Europe which must be the necessary
precedent of a sounder condition. Not merely, of
course, do international situations become infinitely
more dangerous when you get, on both sides of the
frontier, a general "belief in war for war's sake," but
a tendency is directly created to discredit the use of
patience, a quality as much needed in the relationship
of nations as in that of individuals; and further
there is a tendency to justify political action making
for war as against action that might avoid it. All
these pleas, biological and otherwise, are powerful
factors in creating an atmosphere and temperament
in Europe favorable to war and unfavorable to
international agreement. For, be it noted, this
philosophy is not special to any one country: one
finds it plentifully expressed in England and America,
as well as in France and Germany. It is a European
doctrine, part of that "mind of Europe," of which
someone has spoken, that, among other factors,
determines the character of European civilization
generally.</p>
<p>This particular point of view has received a notable
re-statement quite recently<a id="FNanchor_39_39"/><a href="#Footnote_39_39">[39]</a> from General Bernhardi,
a distinguished cavalry General, and probably the
most influential German writer on current strategical
and tactical problems, in his book, "Deutschland
und der nächste Krieg."<a id="FNanchor_40_40"/><a href="#Footnote_40_40">[40]</a> He therein gives very
candid expression to the opinion that Germany
must, regardless of the rights and interests of other
peoples, fight her way to predominance. One of the
chapters is headed, "The Duty to Make War." He
describes the peace movement in Germany as
"poisonous," and proclaims the doctrine that the
duties and tasks of the German people cannot be
fulfilled save by the sword. "The duty of self-assertion
is by no means exhausted in the mere
repelling of hostile attacks. It includes the need
of securing to the whole people, which the State
embraces, the possibility of existence and development."
It is desirable, declares the author, that
conquest shall be effected by war, and not by peaceful
means; Silesia would not have had the same value for
Prussia if Frederick the Great had obtained it from
an Arbitration Court. The attempt to abolish war
is not only "immoral and unworthy of humanity,"
it is an attempt to deprive man of his highest possession—the
right to stake physical life for ideal ends.
The German people "must learn to see that the
maintenance of peace cannot be, and must never be,
the goal of policy."</p>
<p>Similar efforts are being made in England by
English writers to secure the acceptance of this
doctrine of force. Many passages almost duplicating
those of Bernhardi, or at least extolling the general
doctrine of force, may be found in the writings of such
Anglo-Saxon authors as Admiral Mahan and Professor
Spenser Wilkinson.<a id="FNanchor_41_41"/><a href="#Footnote_41_41">[41]</a></p>
<p>A scientific color is often given to the philosophy of
force, as expressed by the authors just referred to,
by an appeal to evolutionary and biological laws.</p>
<p>It is urged that the condition of man's advance in
the past has been the survival of the fit by struggle
and warfare, and that in that struggle it is precisely
those endowed with combativeness and readiness to
fight who have survived. Thus the tendency to combat
is not a mere human perversity, but is part of the
self-protective instinct rooted in a profound biological
law—the struggle of nations for survival.</p>
<p>This point of view is expressed by S.R. Steinmetz
in his "Philosophie des Krieges." War, according
to this author, is an ordeal instituted by God, who
weighs the nations in its balance. It is the essential
function of the State, and the only function in which
peoples can employ all their powers at once and
convergently. No victory is possible save as the
resultant of a totality of virtues; no defeat for which
some vice or weakness is not responsible. Fidelity,
cohesiveness, tenacity, heroism, conscience, education,
inventiveness, economy, wealth, physical health and
vigor—there is no moral or intellectual point of
superiority that does not tell when "God holds His
assizes, and hurls the peoples one upon another"
(Die Weltgeschichte ist das Weltgericht); and Dr.
Steinmetz does not believe that in the long-run
chance and luck play any part in apportioning the
issues.</p>
<p>It is urged that international hostility is merely the
psychological stimulus to that combativeness which
is a necessary element of existence, and that though,
like other elemental instincts—our animal appetites,
for instance—it may in some of its manifestations be
ugly enough, it makes for survival, and is to that
extent a part of the great plan. Too great a readiness
to accept the "friendly assurances" of another
nation and an undue absence of distrust would, in
accordance with a sort of Gresham's Law in international
relationships, make steadily for the disappearance
of the humane and friendly communities
in favor of the truculent and brutal. If friendliness
and good-feeling towards other nations led us to
relax our self-defensive efforts, the quarrelsome
communities would see, in this slackening, an opportunity
to commit aggression, and there would be a
tendency, therefore, for the least civilized to wipe
out the most. Animosity and hostility between
nations is a corrective of this sentimental slackness,
and to that extent it plays a useful rôle, however
ugly it may appear—"not pretty, but useful, like
the dustman." Though the material and economic
motives which prompt conflict may no longer obtain,
other than economic motives will be found for collision,
so profound is the psychological stimulus
thereto.</p>
<p>Some such view as this has found lurid expression
in the recent work of an American soldier, Homer
Lea.<a id="FNanchor_42_42"/><a href="#Footnote_42_42">[42]</a> The author urges not only that war is inevitable,
but that any systematic attempt to prevent
it is merely an unwise meddling with the universal
law.</p>
<blockquote><p>National entities, in their birth, activities, and death,
are controlled by the same laws that govern all life—plant,
animal, or national—the law of struggle, the law
of survival. These laws, so universal as regards life and
time, so unalterable in causation and consummation, are
only variable in the duration of national existence as the
knowledge of and obedience to them is proportionately
true or false. Plans to thwart them, to shortcut them,
to circumvent, to cozen, to deny, to scorn and violate
them, is folly such as man's conceit alone makes possible.
Never has this been tried—and man is ever at it—but
what the end has been gangrenous and fatal.</p>
<p>In theory international arbitration denies the inexorability
of natural laws, and would substitute for them the
veriest Cagliostroic formulas, or would, with the vanity
of Canute, sit down on the ocean-side of life and command
the ebb and flow of its tides to cease.</p>
<p>The idea of international arbitration as a substitute
for natural laws that govern the existence of political
entities arises not only from a denial of their fiats and an
ignorance of their application, but from a total misconception
of war, its causes, and its meaning.</p></blockquote>
<p>Homer Lea's thesis is emphasized in the introduction
to his work, written by another American
soldier, General John P. Storey:</p>
<blockquote><p>A few idealists may have visions that with advancing
civilization war and its dread horrors will cease. Civilization
has not changed human nature. The nature
of man makes war inevitable. Armed strife will not
disappear from the earth until human nature changes.</p></blockquote>
<p>"Weltstadt und Friedensproblem," the book of
Professor Baron Karl von Stengel, a jurist who was
one of Germany's delegates at the First Hague Peace
Conference, contains a chapter entitled "The Significance
of War for Development of Humanity,"
in which the author says:</p>
<blockquote><p>War has more often facilitated than hindered progress.
Athens and Rome, not only in spite of, but just because
of their many wars, rose to the zenith of civilization.
Great States like Germany and Italy are welded into
nationalities only through blood and iron.</p>
<p>Storm purifies the air and destroys the frail trees,
leaving the sturdy oaks standing. War is the test of a
nation's political, physical, and intellectual worth. The
State in which there is much that is rotten may vegetate
for a while in peace, but in war its weakness is revealed.</p>
<p>Germany's preparations for war have not resulted in
economic disaster, but in unexampled economic expansion,
unquestionably because of our demonstrated superiority
over France. It is better to spend money on
armaments and battleships than luxury, motormania, and
other sensual living.</p></blockquote>
<p>We know that Moltke expressed a similar view
in his famous letter to Bluntschli. "A perpetual
peace," declared the Field-Marshal, "is a dream, and
not even a beautiful dream. War is one of the
elements of order in the world, established by God.
The noblest virtues of men are developed therein.
Without war the world would degenerate and disappear
in a morass of materialism."<a id="FNanchor_43_43"/><a href="#Footnote_43_43">[43]</a></p>
<p>At the very time that Moltke was voicing this
sentiment, a precisely similar one was being voiced
by no less a person than Ernest Renan. In his
"La Réforme Intellectuelle et Morale" (Paris: Lévy,
1871, p. 111) he writes:</p>
<blockquote><p>If the foolishness, negligence, idleness, and short-sightedness
of States did not involve their occasional
collision, it is difficult to imagine the degree of degeneracy
to which the human race would descend. War is one
of the conditions of progress, the sting which prevents a
country from going to sleep, and compels satisfied
mediocrity itself to awaken from its apathy. Man is
only sustained by effort and struggle. The day that
humanity achieves a great pacific Roman Empire, having
no external enemies, that day its morality and its intelligence
will be placed in the very greatest peril.</p></blockquote>
<p>In our own times a philosophy not very dissimilar
has been voiced in the public declarations of ex-President
Roosevelt. I choose a few phrases from
his speeches and writings, at random:</p>
<blockquote><p>We despise a nation, just as we despise a man, who
submits to insult. What is true of a man ought to be
true of a nation.<a id="FNanchor_44_44"/><a href="#Footnote_44_44">[44]</a></p>
<p>We must play a great part in the world, and especially
... perform those deeds of blood, of valor, which
above everything else bring national renown.</p>
<p>We do not admire a man of timid peace.</p>
<p>By war alone can we acquire those virile qualities
necessary to win in the stern strife of actual life.</p>
<p>In this world the nation that is trained to a career of
unwarlike and isolated ease is bound to go down in the
end before other nations which have not lost the manly
and adventurous qualities.<a id="FNanchor_45_45"/><a href="#Footnote_45_45">[45]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Professor William James covers the whole ground
of these claims in the following passage:</p>
<blockquote><p>The war party is assuredly right in affirming that the
martial virtues, although originally gained by the race
through war, are absolute and permanent human goods.
Patriotic pride and ambition in their military form are,
after all, only specifications of a more universal and
enduring competitive passion.... Pacifism makes
no converts from the military party. The military party
denies neither the bestiality, nor the horror, nor the
expense; it only says that these things tell but half the
story. It only says that war is worth these things; that,
taking human nature as a whole, war is its best protection
against its weaker and more cowardly self, and that mankind
cannot afford to adopt a peace economy....
Militarism is the great preserver of our ideals of hardihood,
and human life without hardihood would be
contemptible.... This natural feeling forms, I
think, the innermost soul of army writings. Without
any exception known to me, militarist authors take a
highly mystical view of their subject, and regard war
as a biological or sociological necessity.... Our
ancestors have bred pugnacity into our bone and marrow
and thousands of years of peace won't breed it out of us.<a id="FNanchor_46_46"/><a href="#Footnote_46_46">[46]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Even famous English clergymen have voiced the
same view. Charles Kingsley, in his defence of the
Crimean War as a "just war against tyrants and
oppressors," wrote: "For the Lord Jesus Christ is
not only the Prince of Peace, He is the Prince of War,
too. He is the Lord of Hosts, the God of armies, and
whoever fights in a just war against tyrants and
oppressors is fighting on Christ's side, and Christ is
fighting on his side. Christ is his captain and his
leader, and he can be in no better service. Be sure
of it, for the Bible tells you so."<a id="FNanchor_47_47"/><a href="#Footnote_47_47">[47]</a></p>
<p>Canon Newbolt, Dean Farrar, and the Archbishop
of Armagh, have all written not dissimilarly.</p>
<p>The whole case may be summarized thus:</p>
<p>1. Nations fight for opposing conceptions of right:
it is the moral conflict of men.</p>
<p>2. They fight from non-rational causes of a lower
kind: from vanity, rivalry, pride of place, the desire
to occupy a great situation in the world, or from sheer
hostility to dissimilar people—the blind strife of
mutually hating men.</p>
<p>3. These causes justify war, or render it inevitable.
The first is admirable in itself, the second is inevitable,
in that the peoples readiest to fight, and showing
most energy in fighting, replace the more peacefully
inclined, and the warlike type tends thus permanently
to survive; "the warlike nations inherit the earth."</p>
<p>Or it may be put deductively, thus: Since struggle
is the law of life, and a condition of survival as much
with nations as with other organisms, pugnacity,
which is merely intense energy in struggle, a readiness
to accept struggle in its acutest form, must
necessarily be a quality marking those individuals
successful in the vital contests. It is this deep-seated,
biological law which renders impossible
the acceptance by mankind of the literal injunction
to turn the other cheek to the smiter, or for human
nature ever to conform to the ideal implied in that
injunction; since, were it accepted, the best men and
nations—in the sense of the kindliest and most
humane—would be placed at the mercy of the most
brutal, who, eliminating the least brutal, would stamp
the survivors with their own brutality and re-establish
the militarist virtues. For this reason a readiness
to fight, which means the qualities of rivalry
and pride and combativeness, hardihood, tenacity,
and heroism—what we know as the manly qualities—must
in any case survive as the race survives, and,
since this stands in the way of the predominance of
the purely brutal, it is a necessary part of the highest
morality.</p>
<p>Despite the apparent force of these propositions,
they are founded upon a gross misreading of certain
facts, and especially upon a gross misapplication of a
certain biological analogy.</p>
<h3>CHAPTER II</h3>
<p>THE PSYCHOLOGICAL CASE FOR PEACE</p>
<blockquote><p>The shifting ground of pro-war arguments—The narrowing gulf
between the material and moral ideals—The non-rational
causes of war—False biological analogies—The real law of
man's struggle: struggle with Nature, not with other men—Outline
sketch of man's advance and main operating factor
therein—The progress towards elimination of physical force—Co-operation
across frontiers and its psychological result—Impossible
to fix limits of community—Such limits irresistibly
expanding—Break up of State homogeneity—State limits no
longer coinciding with real conflicts between men.</p></blockquote>
<p>Those who have followed at all closely the peace
advocacy of the last few years will have observed a
curious shifting of ground on the part of its opponents.
Until quite recently, most peace advocacy being
based on moral, not material grounds, pacifists were
generally criticized as unduly idealistic, sentimental,
oblivious to the hard necessities of men in a hard
world of struggle, and disposed to ask too much of
human nature in the way of altruistic self-sacrifice
on behalf of an idealistic dogma. We were given
to understand that while peace might represent
a great moral ideal, man's evil passions and
cupidity would always stand in the way of its
achievement. The citations I have given in Chapter
II. of the first part of this book prove sufficiently,
I think, that this was, until quite recently, overwhelmingly
the point of view of those who defended
war as an unavoidable part of human struggle.</p>
<p>During the last few years, however, the defence of
war has been made for the most part on very different
grounds. Peace, we are told by those who oppose
the pacifist movement, may embody the material
interests of men, but the spiritual nature of mankind
will stand in the way of its ever being achieved!
Pacifism, far from being branded as too idealistic and
sentimental, is now scorned as "sordidly material."</p>
<p>I do not desire, in calling attention to this fact,
merely to score a cheap jibe. I want, on the contrary,
to do every justice to the point of view of those
who urge that moral motives push men into war. I
have never, indeed, taken the ground that the defender
of war is morally inferior to the defender of peace, or
that much is to be gained by emphasizing the moral
superiority of the peace ideal. Too often has it been
assumed in pacifist advocacy that what is needed
in order to clear up the difficulties in the international
field, is a better moral tone, a greater kindliness, and
so forth—for that assumption ignores the fact that the
emotion of humanity repelling it from war may be
more than counteracted by the equally strong moral
emotion that we connect with patriotism. The
patriot admits that war may occasion suffering, but
urges that men should be prepared to endure suffering
for their country. As I pointed out in the first
chapter of this book, the pacifist appeal to humanity
so often fails because the militarist pleads that he too
is working and suffering for humanity.</p>
<p>My object in calling attention to this unconscious
shifting of ground, on the part of the advocate of
war, is merely to suggest that the growth of events
during the last generation has rendered the economic
case for war practically untenable, and has consequently
compelled those who defend war to shift their
defence. Nor, of course, am I urging that the sentimental
defence of war is a modern doctrine—the
quotations made in the last chapter show that not to
be the case—but merely that greater emphasis is
now placed upon the moral case.</p>
<p>Thus, writing in 1912, Admiral Mahan criticizes
this book as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>The purpose of armaments, in the minds of those
maintaining them, is not primarily an economical advantage,
in the sense of depriving a neighboring State of its
own, or fear of such consequences to itself through the
deliberate aggression of a rival having that particular
end in view.... The fundamental proposition of the
book is a mistake. Nations are under no illusion as to the
unprofitableness of war in itself.... The entire
conception of the work is itself an illusion, based upon
a profound misreading of human action. To regard the
world as governed by self-interest only is to live in a
non-existent world, an ideal world, a world possessed by
an idea much less worthy than those which mankind,
to do it bare justice, persistently entertains.<a id="FNanchor_48_48"/><a href="#Footnote_48_48">[48]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Yet hardly four years previously Admiral Mahan
had himself outlined the elements of international
politics as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>It is as true now as when Washington penned the
words, and will always be true, that it is vain to expect
nations to act consistently from any motive other than
that of interest. This under the name of Realism is the
frankly avowed motive of German statecraft. It follows
from this directly that the study of interests—international
interest—is the one basis of sound, of provident,
policy for statesmen....</p>
<p>The old predatory instinct, that he should take who has
the power, survives ... and moral force is not sufficient
to determine issues unless supported by physical.
Governments are corporations, and corporations have
no souls ... they must put first the rival interests of
their own wards ... their own people. Commercial
and industrial predominance forces a nation to seek
markets, and, where possible, to control them to its own
advantage by preponderating force, the ultimate expression
of which is possession ... an inevitable link in a
chain of logical sequences: industry, markets, control,
navy bases.<a id="FNanchor_49_49"/><a href="#Footnote_49_49">[49]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Admiral Mahan, it is true, anticipates this criticism
by pleading the complex character of human nature
(which no one denies). He says: "Bronze is copper,
and bronze is tin." But he entirely overlooks the
fact that if one withholds copper or one withholds
tin it is no longer bronze. The present author has
never taken the ground that all international action
can be explained in the terms of one narrow motive,
but he does take the ground that if you can profoundly
modify the bearing of a constituent, as
important as the one to which Admiral Mahan has
himself, in his own work, attributed such weight, you
will profoundly modify the whole texture and character
of international relations. Thus, even though
it were true that the thesis here elaborated were as
narrowly economic as the criticism I have quoted
would imply, it would, nevertheless, have, on Admiral
Mahan's own showing, a very profound bearing on
the problems of international statecraft.</p>
<p>Not only do the principles elaborated here postulate
no such narrow conception of human motive,
but it is essential to realize that you cannot separate
a problem of interest from a problem of right or
morality in the absolute fashion that Admiral Mahan
would imply, because right and morality connote the
protection and promotion of the general interest.</p>
<p>A nation, a people, we are given to understand,
have higher motives than money or "self-interest."
What do we mean when we speak of the money of a
nation, or the self-interest of a community? We
mean—and in such a discussion as this can mean
nothing else—better conditions for the great mass of
the people, the fullest possible lives, the abolition or
attenuation of poverty and of narrow circumstances;
that the millions shall be better housed and clothed
and fed, more capable of making provision for sickness
and old age, with lives prolonged and cheered—and
not merely this, but also that they shall be better
educated, with character disciplined by steady
labor and a better use of leisure; a general social
atmosphere which shall make possible family affection,
individual dignity and courtesy and the graces
of life, not only among the few, but among the many.</p>
<p>Now, do these things constitute, as a national
policy, an inspiring aim, or not? They are, speaking
in terms of communities, pure self-interest—bound
up with economic problems, with money. Does
Admiral Mahan mean us to take him at his word
when he would attach to such efforts the same discredit
that one implies in talking of a mercenary
individual? Would he have us believe that the
typical great movements of our time—Socialism,
Trades Unionism, Syndicalism, Insurance Acts, Land
Reforms, Old Age Pensions, Charity Organization,
improved Education—bound up as they all are with
economic problems—are not the objects which, more
and more, are absorbing the best activities of
Christendom?</p>
<p>In the pages which follow, I have attempted to
show that the activities which lie outside the range
of these things—the religious wars, movements like
those which promoted the Crusades, or the sort of
tradition which we associate with the duel (which has,
in fact, disappeared from Anglo-Saxon society)—do
not, and cannot, any longer form part of the impulse
creating the long-sustained conflicts between large
groups which a European war implies. I have
attempted roughly to indicate certain processes at
work; to show, among other things, that in the
changing character of men's ideals there is a distinct
narrowing of the gulf which is supposed to separate
ideal and material aims. Early ideals, whether in
the field of politics or religion, are generally dissociated
from any aim of general well-being. In
early politics, ideals are concerned simply with personal
allegiance to some dynastic chief, a feudal lord,
or a monarch; the well-being of a community does
not enter into the matter at all. Later the chief
must embody in his person that well-being, or he
does not obtain the allegiance of a community
of any enlightenment; later, the well-being of the
community becomes the end in itself, without being
embodied in the person of an hereditary chief, so
that the people realize that their efforts, instead of
being directed to the protection of the personal interests
of some chief, are as a matter of fact directed
to the protection of their own interests, and their
altruism has become communal self-interest, since
the self-sacrifice of the community for the sake of
the community is a contradiction in terms. In the
religious sphere a similar development has occurred.
Early religious ideals have no relation to the material
betterment of mankind. The early Christian
thought it meritorious to live a sterile life at the top
of a pillar, eaten by vermin, just as the Hindoo saint
to-day thinks it meritorious to live an equally sterile
life upon a bed of spikes. But as the early Christian
ideal progressed, sacrifices having no end connected
with the betterment of mankind lost their appeal.
Our admiration now goes, not to the recluse who does
nothing for mankind, but rather to the priest who
gives his life to bring a ray of comfort to a leper
settlement. The Christian saint who would allow
the nails of his fingers to grow through the palms
of his clasped hands would excite, not our admiration,
but our revolt. More and more is religious effort
being subjected to this test: Does it make for the
improvement of society? If not, it stands condemned.
Political ideals are inevitably undergoing a similar
development, and will be more and more subjected
to a similar test.<a id="FNanchor_50_50"/><a href="#Footnote_50_50">[50]</a></p>
<p>I am aware that very often at present they are not
thus tested. Dominated as our political thought
is by Roman and feudal imagery—hypnotized by
symbols and analogies which the necessary development
of organized society has rendered obsolete—the
ideals even of democracies are still often pure
abstractions, divorced from any aim calculated to
advance the moral or material betterment of
mankind. The craze for sheer size of territory,
the mere extent of administrative area, is still
deemed a thing deserving immense, incalculable
sacrifices.</p>
<p>Even these ideals, however, firmly set as they are in
our language and tradition, are rapidly yielding to
the necessary force of events. A generation ago it
would have been inconceivable that a people or a
monarch should calmly see part of its country secede
and establish itself as a separate political entity without
attempting to prevent it by force of arms. Yet
this is what happened, a year or two ago, in the
Scandinavian peninsula. For forty years Germany
has added to her own difficulties and to those of the
European situation for the purpose of including
Alsace and Lorraine in its Federation, but even there,
obeying the tendency which is world-wide, an
attempt has been made to create a constitutional
and autonomous government. The history of the
British Empire for fifty years has been a process of
undoing the work of conquest. Colonies are now
neither colonies nor possessions; they are independent
States. England, which for centuries has made
such sacrifices to retain Ireland, is now making great
sacrifices in order to make her secession workable.
To each political arrangement, to each political ideal,
the final test will be applied: does it, or does it not,
make for the widest interests of the mass of the people
involved?</p>
<p>It is true that those who emphasize the psychological
causes of war might rejoin with another
distinction. They might urge that, though the
questions dividing nations had more or less their
origin in an economic problem, the economic question
becomes itself a moral question, a question of
right. It was not the few pence of the tax on tea
that the Colonies fought about, but the question of
right which its payment involved. So with nations.
War, ineffective to achieve an economic end, unprofitable
in the sense that the cost involved in the defence
of a given economic point exceeds the monetary value
of that point, will still be fought because a point,
trifling in the economic sense, is all important from
the point of view of right; and though there is no real
division of interests between nations, though those
interests are in reality interdependent, minor differences
provoking a sudden and uncontrolled flash
of temper suffice to provoke war. War is the outcome
of the "hot fits" of men, "of the devil that is
in them."</p>
<p>Although militarist literature on this, as on most
similar points, shows flagrant contradictions, even
that literature is against the view that war is the
outcome of the sheer sudden temper of nations.
Most of the popular, and all of the scientific, militarist
writers take the contrary view. Mr. Blatchford
and his school normally represent a typical
militarist policy, like that of Germany, as actuated
by a cold, deep, Machiavellian, unsentimental,
calculated opportunism, as diverse from a wild,
irrational explosion of feeling as possible. Mr.
Blatchford writes:</p>
<blockquote><p>German policy, based upon the teachings of Clausewitz,
may be expressed in two questions, the questions
laid down by Clausewitz: "Is it expedient to do this?
Have we the power to do it?" If it will benefit the
Fatherland to break up the British Empire, then it is
expedient to break up the British Empire. Clausewitz
taught Germany that "war is a part of policy." He
taught that policy is a system of bargaining or negotiating,
backed by arms. Clausewitz does not discuss the
moral aspect of war; he deals with power and expediency.
His pupils take his lead. They do not read poems on
the blessings of peace; they do not spend ink on philanthropic
theories.</p></blockquote>
<p>All the more scientific writers, without an exception,
so far as I am aware, repudiate its "accidental"
character. They one and all, from Grotius to Von
der Goltz, take the view that it results from definite
and determinable laws, like all the great processes
of human development.</p>
<p>Von der Goltz ("On the Conduct of War") says:</p>
<blockquote><p>One must never lose sight of the fact that war is the
consequence and continuation of policy. One will act on
the defensive strategically or rest on the defensive
according as the policy has been offensive or defensive.
An offensive and defensive policy is in its turn indicated
by the line of conduct dictated historically. We see this
very clearly in antiquity by the example furnished us
in the Persians and Romans. In their wars we see the
strategical rôle following the bend of the historical rôle.
The people which in its historical development has
arrived at the stage of inertia, or even retrogression, will
not carry on a policy of offence, but merely one of defence;
a nation in that situation will wait to be attacked, and
its strategy will consequently be defensive, and from a
defensive strategy will follow necessarily a defensive
tactic.</p></blockquote>
<p>Lord Esher has expressed a like thought.<a id="FNanchor_51_51"/><a href="#Footnote_51_51">[51]</a></p>
<p>But whether wars result from sheer temper,
national "hot fits," or not, it is quite certain that the
lengthy preparation for war, the condition of armed
peace, the burden of armaments which is almost
worse than an occasional war, does not result therefrom.</p>
<p>The paraphernalia of war in the modern world cannot
be improvised on the spur of the moment to meet
each gust of ill-feeling, and be dropped when it is over.
The building of battleships, the discussion of budgets
and the voting of them, the training of armies, the
preparation of a campaign, are a long business, and
more and more in our day does each distinctive campaign
involve a special and distinctive preparation.
The pundits declare that the German battleships
have been especially built with a view to work in the
North Sea. In any case, we know that the conflict
with Germany has been going on for ten years. This
is surely a rather prolonged "hot fit." The truth
is that war in the modern world is the outcome of
armed peace, and involves, with all its elaborate
machinery of yearly budgets, and slowly built
warships and forts, and slowly trained armies, fixity
of policy and purpose extending over years, and
sometimes generations. Men do not make these
sacrifices month after month, year after year, pay
taxes, and upset Governments and fight in Parliament
for a mere passing whim; and as conflicts
necessarily become more scientific, we shall in the
nature of things be forced to prepare everything more
thoroughly, and have clearer and sounder ideas as to
their essence, their cause, and their effects, and to
watch more closely their relation to national motive
and policy. The final justification for all these
immense, humdrum, workaday sacrifices must be
more and more national well-being.</p>
<p>This does not imply, as some critics allege, the
conclusion that an Englishman is to say: "Since I
might be just as well off under the Germans, let
them come"; but that the German will say: "Since
I shall be no better off for the going, I will not go."</p>
<p>Indeed, the case of the authorities cited in the
preceding chapter is marked by a false form of
statement. Those who plead for war on moral
grounds say: "War will go on because men will
defend their ideals, moral, political, social, and religious."
It should be stated thus: "War will go
on because men will always attack the spiritual possessions
of other men," because, of course, the necessity
for defence arises from the fact that these
possessions are in danger of attack.</p>
<p>Put in the second form, however, the case breaks
down almost of itself. The least informed of us
realizes that the whole trend of history is against the
tendency for men to attack the ideals and the beliefs
of other men. In the religious domain that tendency
is plain, so much so that the imposition of religious
ideals or beliefs by force has practically been abandoned
in Europe, and the causes which have wrought
this change of attitude in the European mind are just
as operative in the field of politics.</p>
<p>Those causes have been, in the religious field, of a
twofold nature, both having direct bearing on the
problem with which we are dealing. The first cause
is that at which I have already hinted, the general
shifting of the ideals from sterile aims to those concerned
with the improvement of society; the second
one being that development of communication
which has destroyed the spiritual homogeneity of
States.</p>
<p>A given movement of religious opinion is not confined
to one State, transforming it completely, while
another current of opinion transforms completely in
another sense another State; but it goes on piecemeal,
<i>pari passu</i>, in the various States. Very early
in the religious development of Europe there ceased
to be such a thing as a purely Catholic or a purely
Protestant State: the religious struggle went on
inside the political frontiers—between the people of
the same State. The struggle of political and social
ideas must take a like course. Those struggles of
ideas will be carried out, not between States, but
between different groups in the same State, those
groups acting in intellectual co-operation with
corresponding groups in other States. This intellectual
co-operation across frontiers is a necessary
outcome of the similar economic co-operation athwart
frontiers which the physical division of labor, owing
to the development of communication, has set up.
It has become impossible for the army of a State to
embody the fight for an ideal, for the simple reason
that the great moral questions of our time can
no longer be postulated in national terms. What
follows will make this plain.</p>
<p>There remains a final moral claim for war: that
it is a needed moral discipline for nations, the supreme
test for the survival of the fittest.</p>
<p>In the first chapter of this section, I have pointed
out the importance of this plea in determining the
general character of European public opinion, on
which alone depends the survival or the disappearance
of the militarist regimen. Yet in strict logic there
is no need to rebut this claim in detail at all, for only
a small fraction of those who believe in it have the
courage of their convictions.</p>
<p>The defender of large armaments always justifies
his position on the ground that such armaments
ensure peace. <i>Si vis pacem</i>, etc. As between war
and peace he has made his choice, and he has chosen,
as the definite object of his endeavors, peace.
Having directed his efforts to secure peace, he must
accept whatever disadvantages there may lie in that
state. He is prepared to admit that, of the two
states, peace is preferable, and it is peace towards
which our efforts should be directed. Having decided
on that aim, what utility is there in showing
that it is an undesirable one?</p>
<p>We must, as a matter of fact, be honest for our
opponent. We must assume that in an alternative,
where his action would determine the issue of war or
peace, he will allow that action to be influenced by
the general consideration that war might make for
the moral advantage of his country. More important
even than this consideration is that of the
general national temper, to which his philosophy,
however little in keeping with his professed policy
and desire, necessarily gives rise. For these reasons
it is worth while to consider in detail the biological
case which he presents.</p>
<p>The illusion underlying that case arises from the
indiscriminate application of scientific formulæ.</p>
<p>Struggle is the law of survival with man, as elsewhere,
but it is the struggle of man with the universe,
not man with man. Dog does not eat dog—even
tigers do not live on one another. Both dogs and
tigers live upon their prey.</p>
<p>It is true that as against this it is argued that dogs
struggle with one another for the same prey—if the
supply of food runs short the weakest dog, or the
weakest tiger, starves. But an analogy between
this state and one in which co-operation is a direct
means of increasing the supply of food, obviously
breaks down. If dogs and tigers were groups,
organized on the basis of the division of labor, even
the weak dogs and tigers could, conceivably, perform
functions which would increase the food supply of
the group as a whole, and, conceivably, their existence
would render the security of that supply
greater than would their elimination. If to-day a
territory like England supports in comfort, a population
of 45,000,000, where in other times rival groups,
numbering at most two or three millions, found
themselves struggling with one another for a bare
subsistence, the greater quantity of food and the
greater security of the supply is not due to any process
of elimination of Wessex men by Northumbrian
men, but is due precisely to the fact that this rivalry
has been replaced by common action against their
prey, the forces of nature. The obvious facts of the
development of communities show that there is a
progressive replacement of rivalry by co-operation,
and that the vitality of the social organism increases
in direct ratio to the efficiency of the co-operation, and
to the abandonment of the rivalry, between its parts.<a id="FNanchor_52_52"/><a href="#Footnote_52_52">[52]</a></p>
<p>All crude analogies between the processes of plant
and animal survival and social survival are vitiated,
therefore, by disregarding the dynamic element of
conscious co-operation.</p>
<p>That mankind as a whole represents the organism
and the planet the environment, to which
he is more and more adapting himself, is the only
conclusion that consorts with the facts. If struggle
between men is the true reading of the law of
life, those facts are absolutely inexplicable, for he
is drifting away from conflict, from the use of physical
force, and towards co-operation. This much
is unchallengeable, as the facts which follow will
show.</p>
<p>But in that case, if struggle for extermination of
rivals between men is the law of life, mankind is
setting at naught the natural law, and must be on
the way to extinction.</p>
<p>Happily the natural law in this matter has been
misread. The individual in his sociological aspect
is not the complete organism. He who attempts to
live without association with his fellows dies. Nor
is the nation the complete organism. If Britain
attempted to live without co-operation with other
nations, half the population would starve. The
completer the co-operation the greater the vitality;
the more imperfect the co-operation the less the
vitality. Now, a body, the various parts of which
are so interdependent that without co-ordination
vitality is reduced or death ensures, must be regarded,
in so far as the functions in question are concerned,
not as a collection of rival organisms, but as one.
This is in accord with what we know of the character
of living organisms in their conflict with environment.
The higher the organism, the greater the elaboration
and interdependence of its part, the greater the need
for co-ordination.<a id="FNanchor_53_53"/><a href="#Footnote_53_53">[53]</a></p>
<p>If we take this as the reading of the biological law,
the whole thing becomes plain; man's irresistible
drift away from conflict and towards co-operation is
but the completer adaptation of the organism (man)
to its environment (the planet, wild nature), resulting
in a more intense vitality.</p>
<p>The psychological development involved in man's
struggle along these lines may best be stated by an
outline sketch of the character of his advance.</p>
<p>When I kill my prisoner (cannibalism was a very
common characteristic of early man), it is in "human
nature" to keep him for my own larder without
sharing him. It is the extreme form of the use of
force, the extreme form of human individualism.
But putrefaction sets in before I can consume him
(it is as well to recall these real difficulties of the early
man, because, of course, "human nature does not
change"), and I am left without food.</p>
<p>But my two neighbors, each with his butchered
prisoner, are in a similar difficulty, and though I
could quite easily defend my larder, we deem it
better on the next occasion to join forces and kill
one prisoner at a time. I share mine with the other
two; they share theirs with me. There is no waste
through putrefaction. It is the earliest form of the
surrender of the use of force in favor of co-operation—the
first attenuation of the tendency to act on
impulse. But when the three prisoners are consumed,
and no more happen to be available, it
strikes us that on the whole we should have done
better to make them catch game and dig roots for
us. The next prisoners that are caught are not
killed—a further diminution of impulse and the
factor of physical force—they are only enslaved,
and the pugnacity which in the first case went to
kill them is now diverted to keeping them at work.
But the pugnacity is so little controlled by rationalism
that the slaves starve, and prove incapable of
useful work. They are better treated; there is a
diminution of pugnacity. They become sufficiently
manageable for the masters themselves, while the
slaves are digging roots, to do a little hunting. The
pugnacity recently expended on the slaves is redirected
to keeping hostile tribes from capturing
them—a difficult matter, because the slaves themselves
show a disposition to try a change of mastership.
They are bribed into good behavior by
better treatment: a further diminution of force, a
further drift towards co-operation; they give labor,
we give food and protection. As the tribes enlarge,
it is found that those have most cohesion where the
position of slaves is recognized by definite rights and
privileges. Slavery becomes serfdom or villeiny.
The lord gives land and protection, the serf labor
and military service: a further drift from force, a
further drift towards co-operation, exchange. With
the introduction of money even the form of force
disappears: the laborer pays rent and the lord
pays his soldiers. It is free exchange on both sides,
and economic force has replaced physical force.
The further the drift from force towards simple
economic interest the better the result for the effort
expended. The Tartar khan, who seizes by force
the wealth in his State, giving no adequate return,
soon has none to seize. Men will not work to create
what they cannot enjoy, so that, finally, the khan
has to kill a man by torture in order to obtain a
sum which is the thousandth part of what a London
tradesman will spend to secure a title carrying no
right to the exercise of force from a Sovereign who
has lost all right to the use or exercise of physical
force, the head of the wealthiest country in the world,
the sources of whose wealth are the most removed
from any process involving the exercise of physical
force.</p>
<p>But while this process is going on inside the tribe,
or group, or nation, force and hostility as between
differing tribes or nations remain; but not undiminished.
At first it suffices for the fuzzy head of a
rival tradesman to appear above the bushes for
primitive man to want to hit it. He is a foreigner:
kill him. Later, he only wants to kill him if he is
at war with his tribe. There are periods of peace:
diminution of hostility. In the first conflicts all
of the other tribe are killed—men, women, and children.
Force and pugnacity are absolute. But the
use of slaves, both as laborers and as concubines,
attentuates this; there is a diminution of force.
The women of the hostile tribe bear children by the
conqueror: there is a diminution of pugnacity. At
the next raid into the hostile territory it is found that
there is nothing to take, because everything has been
killed or carried off. So on later raids the conqueror
kills the chiefs only (a further diminution of pugnacity,
a further drift from mere impulse), or merely
dispossesses them of their lands, which he divides
among his followers (Norman Conquest type). We
have already passed the stage of extermination.<a id="FNanchor_54_54"/><a href="#Footnote_54_54">[54]</a>
The conqueror simply absorbs the conquered—or
the conquered absorbs the conqueror, whichever you
like. It is no longer the case of one gobbling up
the other. Neither is gobbled. In the next stage
we do not even dispossess the chiefs—a further sacrifice
of physical force—we merely impose tribute.
But the conquering nation soon finds itself in the
position of the khan in his own State—the more he
squeezes the less he gets, until, finally, the cost of
getting the money by military means exceeds what
is obtained. It was the case of Spain in Spanish
America—the more territory she "owned" the
poorer she became. The wise conqueror, then, finds
that better than the exaction of tribute is an exclusive
market—old English colonial type. But in the
process of ensuring exclusiveness more is lost than is
gained: the colonies are allowed to choose their own
system—further drift from the use of force, further
drift from hostility and pugnacity. Final result:
complete abandonment of physical force, co-operation
on basis of mutual profit the only relationship,
with reference not merely to colonies which have
become in fact foreign States, but also to States
foreign in name as well as in fact. We have arrived
not at the intensification of the struggle between men,
but at a condition of vital dependence upon the
prosperity of foreigners. Could England by some
magic kill all foreigners, half the British population
would starve. This is not a condition making
indefinitely for hostility to foreigners; still less is it
a condition in which such hostility finds its justification
in any real instinct of self-preservation or in any
deep-seated biological law. With each new intensification
of dependence between the parts of the
organism must go that psychological development
which has marked every stage of the progress in the
past, from the day that we killed our prisoner in order
to eat him, and refused to share him with our fellow,
to the day that the telegraph and the bank have
rendered military force economically futile.</p>
<p>But the foregoing does not include all the facts, or
all the factors. If Russia does England an injury—sinks
a fishing fleet in time of peace, for instance—it
is no satisfaction to Englishmen to go out and kill
a lot of Frenchmen or Irishmen. They want to
kill Russians. If, however, they knew a little less
geography—if, for instance, they were Chinese
Boxers, it would not matter in the least which they
killed, because to the Chinaman all alike are "foreign
devils"; his knowledge of the case does not enable
him to differentiate between the various nationalities
of Europeans. In the case of a wronged negro in
the Congo the collective responsibility is still wider;
for a wrong inflicted by one white man he will avenge
himself on any other—American, German, English,
French, Dutch, Belgian, or Chinese. As our knowledge
increases, our sense of the collective responsibility
of outside groups narrows. But immediately
we start on this differentiation there is no stopping.
The English yokel is satisfied if he can "get a whack
at them foreigners"—Germans will do if Russians
are not available. The more educated man wants
Russians; but if he stops a moment longer, he will
see that in killing Russian peasants he might as well
be killing so many Hindoos, for all they had to do
with the matter. He then wants to get at the Russian
Government. But so do a great many Russians—Liberals,
Reformers, etc. He then sees that the
real conflict is not English against Russians at all,
but the interest of all law-abiding folk—Russian
and English alike—against oppression, corruption,
and incompetence. To give the Russian Government
an opportunity of going to war would only
strengthen its hands against those with whom he was
in sympathy—the Reformers. As war would increase
the influence of the reactionary party in
Russia, it would do nothing to prevent the recurrence
of such incidents, and so quite the wrong party
would suffer. Were the real facts and the real
responsibilities understood, a Liberal people would
reply to such an aggression by taking every means
which the social and economic relationship of the
two States afforded to enable Russian Liberals to
hang a few Russian Admirals and establish a Russian
Liberal Government. In any case, the realization
of the fact attenuates hostility. In the same way,
as they become more familiar with the facts, the
English will attenuate their hostility to "Germans."
An English patriot recently said, "We must smash
Prussianism." The majority of Germans are in
cordial agreement with him, and are working to that
end. But if England went to war for that purpose,
Germans would be compelled to fight for Prussianism.
War between States for a political ideal of this kind
is not only futile, it is the sure means of perpetuating
the very condition which it would bring to an end.
International hostilities repose for the most part
upon our conception of the foreign State, with which
we are quarrelling, as a homogeneous personality,
having the same character of responsibility as an
individual, whereas the variety of interests, both
material and moral, regardless of State boundaries,
renders the analogy between nations and individuals
an utterly false one.</p>
<p>Indeed, when the co-operation between the parts
of the social organism is as complete as our mechanical
development has recently made it, it is impossible
to fix the limits not merely of the economic interests,
but of the moral interest of the community, and to
say what is one community and what is another.
Certainly the State limits no longer define the limits
of the community; and yet it is only the State limits
which international antagonism predicates. If the
Louisiana cotton crop fails, a part of Lancashire
starves. There is closer community of interest in
a vital matter between Lancashire and Louisiana than
between Louisiana and, say, Iowa, parts of the same
State. There is much closer intercommunication
between Britain and the United States in all that
touches social and moral development than between
Britain and, say, Bengal, part of the same State.
An English nobleman has more community of
thought and feeling with a European continental
aristocrat (will marry his daughter, for instance)
than he would think of claiming with such "fellow"
British countrymen as a Bengal Babu, a Jamaica
negro, or even a Dorset yokel. A professor at
Oxford will have closer community of feeling with
a member of the French Academy than with, say, a
Whitechapel publican. One may go further, and
say that a British subject of Quebec has closer contact
with Paris than with London; the British
subject of Dutch-speaking Africa with Holland than
with England; the British subject of Hong Kong
with Pekin than with London; of Egypt, with
Constantinople than with London, and so on. In a
thousand respects, association cuts across State
boundaries, which are purely conventional, and
renders the biological division of mankind into independent
and warring States a scientific ineptitude.</p>
<p>Allied factors, introduced by the character of
modern intercourse, have already gone far to render
territorial conquest futile for the satisfaction of
natural human pride and vanity. Just as in the
economic sphere, factors peculiar to our generation
have rendered the old analogy between States and
persons a false one, so do these factors render the
analogy in the sentimental sphere a false one. While
the individual of great possessions does in fact obtain,
by reason of his wealth, a deference which satisfies
his pride and vanity, the individual of the great
nation has no such sentimental advantage as against
the citizen of the small nation. No one thinks of
respecting the Russian mujik because he belongs to
a great nation, or despising a Scandinavian or Belgian
gentleman because he belongs to a small one; and
any society will accord prestige to the nobleman of
Norway, Holland, Belgium, Spain, or even Portugal,
which it refuses to an American "Climber." The
nobleman of any country will marry the noblewoman
of another more readily than a woman from a lower
class of his own country. The prestige of the foreign
country rarely counts for anything in the matter,
when it comes to the real facts of everyday life, so
shallow is the real sentiment which now divides
States. Just as in material things community of
interest and relationship cut clear across State
boundaries, so inevitably will the psychic community
of interest come so to do.</p>
<p>Just as, in the material domain, the real biological
law, which is association and co-operation between
individuals of the same species in the struggle with
their environment, has pushed men in their material
struggle to conform with that law, so will it do so in
the sentimental sphere. We shall come to realize
that the real psychic and moral divisions are not as
between nations, but as between opposing conceptions
of life. Even admitting that man's nature
will never lose the combativeness, hostility, and
animosity which are so large a part of it (although
the manifestations of such feelings have so greatly
changed within the historical period as almost to have
changed in character), what we shall see is the diversion
of those psychological qualities to the real,
instead of the artificial, conflict of mankind. We
shall see that at the bottom of any conflict between
the armies or Governments of Germany and England
lies not the opposition of "German" interests to
"English" interests, but the conflict in both States
between democracy and autocracy, or between
Socialism and Individualism, or reaction and progress,
however one's sociological sympathies may classify
it. That is the real division in both countries, and
for Germans to conquer English, or English Germans,
would not advance the solution of such a conflict
one iota; and as such conflict becomes more acute,
the German individualist will see that it is more
important to protect his freedom and property
against the Socialist and trade unionist, who can
and do attack them, than against the British Army,
which cannot. In the same way the British Tory
will be more concerned with what Mr. Lloyd George's
Budgets can do than with what the Germans can do.<a id="FNanchor_55_55"/><a href="#Footnote_55_55">[55]</a>
From the realization of these things to the realization
on the part of the British democrat that what stands
in the way of his securing for social expenditure
enormous sums, that now go to armaments, is mainly
a lack of co-operation between himself and the
democrats of a hostile nation who are in a like case,
is but a step, and a step that, if history has any meaning,
is bound shortly to be taken. When it is taken,
property, capital, Individualism will have to give to
its international organization, already far-reaching, a
still more definite form, in which international differences
will play no part. And when that condition is
reached, both peoples will find inconceivable the idea
that artificial State divisions (which are coming more
and more to approximate to mere administrative divisions,
leaving free scope within them or across them
for the development of genuine nationality) could
ever in any way define the real conflicts of mankind.</p>
<p>There remains, of course, the question of time; that
these developments will take "thousands" or "hundreds"
of years. Yet the interdependence of modern
nations is the growth of little more than fifty years.
A century ago England could have been self-supporting,
and little the worse for it. One must not overlook
the Law of Acceleration. The age of man on the
earth is placed variously at from thirty thousand to
three hundred thousand years. He has in some respects
developed more in the last two hundred years
than in all the preceding ages. We see more change
now in ten years than originally in ten thousand.
Who shall foretell the developments of a generation?</p>
<h3>CHAPTER III</h3>
<p>UNCHANGING HUMAN NATURE</p>
<blockquote><p>The progress from cannibalism to Herbert Spencer—The disappearance
of religious oppression by government—Disappearance of
the duel—The Crusaders and the Holy Sepulchre—The wail
of militarist writers at man's drift away from militancy.</p></blockquote>
<p>All of us who have had occasion to discuss this
subject are familiar with the catch-phrases with
which the whole matter is so often dismissed. "You
cannot change human nature," "What man always
has been during thousands of years, he always will
be," are the sort of dicta generally delivered as self-evident
propositions that do not need discussion.
Or if, in deference to the fact that very profound
changes, in which human nature is involved, <i>have</i>
taken place in the habits of mankind, the statement
of the proposition is somewhat less dogmatic, we
are given to understand that any serious modification
of the tendency to go to war can only be looked for
in "thousands of years."</p>
<p>What are the facts? They are these:</p>
<p>That the alleged unchangeability of human nature
in this matter is not borne out; that man's pugnacity
though not disappearing, is very visibly, under the
forces of mechanical and social development, being
transformed and diverted from ends that are wasteful
and destructive to ends that are less wasteful,
which render easier that co-operation between men
in the struggle with their environment which is the
condition of their survival and advance; that changes
which, in the historical period, have been extraordinarily
rapid are necessarily quickening—quickening
in geometrical rather than in arithmetical ratio.</p>
<p>With very great courtesy, one is impelled to ask
those who argue that human nature in all its manifestations
must remain unchanged how they interpret
history. We have seen man progress from the
mere animal fighting with other animals, seizing
his food by force, seizing also by force his females,
eating his own kind, the sons of the family struggling
with the father for the possession of the father's
wives; we have seen this incoherent welter of animal
struggle at least partly abandoned for settled industry,
and partly surviving as a more organized tribal
warfare or a more ordered pillaging, like that of the
Vikings and the Huns; we have seen even these
pillagers abandon in part their pillaging for ordered
industry, and in part for the more ceremonial conflict
of feudal struggle; we have seen even the feudal
conflict abandoned in favor of dynastic and religious
and territorial conflict, and then dynastic and
religious conflict abandoned. There remains now
only the conflict of States, and that, too, at a time
when the character and conception of the State are
being profoundly modified.</p>
<p>Human nature may not change, whatever that
vague phrase may mean; but human nature is a
complex factor. It includes numberless motives,
many of which are modified in relation to the rest as
circumstances change; so that the manifestations of
human nature change out of all recognition. Do
we mean by the phrase that "human nature does
not change" that the feelings of the paleolithic man
who ate the bodies of his enemies and of his own
children are the same as those of a Herbert Spencer,
or even of the modern New Yorker who catches his
subway train to business in the morning? If human
nature does not change, may we therefore expect
the city clerk to brain his mother and serve her up
for dinner, or suppose that Lord Roberts or Lord
Kitchener is in the habit, while on campaign, of
catching the babies of his enemies on spear-heads,
or driving his motor-car over the bodies of young
girls, like the leaders of the old Northmen in their
ox-wagons.</p>
<p>What <i>do</i> these phrases mean? These, and many
like them, are repeated in a knowing way with an
air of great wisdom and profundity by journalists
and writers of repute, and one may find them blatant
any day in our newspapers and reviews; yet the
most cursory examination proves them to be neither
wise nor profound, but simply parrot-like catch-phrases
which lack common sense, and fly in the face
of facts of everyday experience.</p>
<p>The truth is that the facts of the world as they
stare us in the face show that, in our common attitude,
we not only overlook the modifications in human
nature, which have occurred historically since yesterday—occurred
even in our generation—but we also
ignore the modification of human nature which mere
differences of social habit and custom and outlook
effect. Take the case of the duel. Even educated
people in Germany, France, and Italy, will tell you
that it is "not in human nature" to expect a man of
gentle birth to abandon the habit of the duel; the
notion that honorable people should ever so place
their honor at the mercy of whoever may care
to insult them is, they assure you, both childish
and sordid. With them the matter will not bear
discussion.</p>
<p>Yet the great societies which exist in England,
North America, Australia—the whole Anglo-Saxon
world, in fact—have abandoned the duel, and we
cannot lump the whole Anglo-Saxon race as either
sordid or childish.</p>
<p>That such a change as this, which must have conflicted
with human pugnacity in its most insidious
form,—pride and personal vanity, the traditions of
an aristocratic status, every one of the psychological
factors now involved in international conflict—has
been effected in our own generation should surely give
pause to those who dismiss as chimerical any hope
that rationalism will ever dominate the conduct of
nations.</p>
<p>Discussing the impossibility of allowing arbitration
to cover all causes of difference, Mr. Roosevelt
remarked, in justification of large armaments: "We
despise a nation, just as we despise a man, who fails
to resent an insult."<a id="FNanchor_56_56"/><a href="#Footnote_56_56">[56]</a> Mr. Roosevelt seems to
forget that the duel with us is extinct. Do <i>we</i>, the
English-speaking people of the world, to whom presumably
Mr. Roosevelt must have been referring,
despise a man who fails to resent an insult by arms?
Would we not, on the contrary, despise the man who
should do so? Yet so recent is this charge that it has
not yet reached the majority of Europeans.</p>
<p>The vague talk of national honor, as a quality
under the especial protection of the soldier, shows,
perhaps more clearly than aught else, how much our
notions concerning international politics have fallen
behind the notions that dominate us in everyday
life. When an individual begins to rave about his
honor, we may be pretty sure he is about to do
some irrational, most likely some disreputable deed.
The word is like an oath, serving with its vague yet
large meaning to intoxicate the fancy. Its vagueness
and elasticity make it possible to regard a given
incident, at will, as either harmless or a <i>casus belli</i>.
Our sense of proportion in these matters approximates
to that of the schoolboy. The passing jeer of
a foreign journalist, a foolish cartoon, is sufficient to
start the dogs of war baying up and down the land.<a id="FNanchor_57_57"/><a href="#Footnote_57_57">[57]</a>
We call it "maintaining the national prestige,"
"enforcing respect," and I know not what other
high-sounding name. It amounts to the same thing
in the end.</p>
<p>The one distinctive advance in civil society
achieved by the Anglo-Saxon world is fairly betokened
by the passing away of this old notion of a
peculiar possession in the way of honor, which has
to be guarded by arms. It stands out as the one
clear moral gain of the nineteenth century; and,
when we observe the notion resurging in the minds
of men, we may reasonably expect to find that it
marks one of those reversions in development which
so often occur in the realm of mind as well as in that
of organic forms.</p>
<p>Two or three generations since, this progress,
even among Anglo-Saxons, towards a rational standard
of conduct in this matter, as between individuals,
would have seemed as unreasonable as do the hopes
of international peace in our day. Even to-day the
continental officer is as firmly convinced as ever that
the maintenance of personal dignity is impossible
save by the help of the duel. He will ask in triumph,
"What will you do if one of your own order openly
insults you? Can you preserve your self-respect by
summoning him to the police-court?" And the
question is taken as settling the matter offhand.</p>
<p>The survival, where national prestige is concerned,
of the standards of the <i>code duello</i> is daily brought
before us by the rhetoric of the patriots. Our army
and our navy, not the good faith of our statesmen,
are the "guardians of our national honor." Like
the duellist, the patriot would have us believe that a
dishonorable act is made honorable if the party
suffering by the dishonor be killed. The patriot is
careful to withdraw from the operation of possible
arbitration all questions which could affect the
"national honor." An "insult to the flag" must
be "wiped out in blood." Small nations, which in
the nature of the case cannot so resent the insults of
great empires, have apparently no right to such
a possession as "honor." It is the peculiar prerogative
of world-wide empires. The patriots who
would thus resent "insults to the flag" may well be
asked whether they would condemn the conduct of
the German lieutenant who kills the unarmed civilian
in cold blood "for the honor of the uniform."</p>
<p>It does not seem to have struck the patriot that,
as personal dignity and conduct have not suffered but
been improved by the abandonment of the principle
of the duel, there is little reason to suppose that international
conduct, or national dignity, would suffer
by a similar change of standards.</p>
<p>The whole philosophy underlying the duel, where
personal relations are concerned, excites in our day
the infinite derision of all Anglo-Saxons. Yet these
same Anglo-Saxons maintain it as rigorously as ever
in the relations of States.</p>
<p>Profound as is the change involved in the Anglo-Saxon
abandonment of the duel, a still more universal
change, affecting still more nearly our psychological
impulses, has been effected within a relatively recent
historical period. I refer to the abandonment, by
the Governments of Europe, of their right to prescribe
the religious belief of their citizens. For
hundreds of years, generation after generation, it
was regarded as an evident part of a ruler's right
and duty to dictate what his subjects should believe.</p>
<p>As Lecky has pointed out, the preoccupation which,
for numberless generations, was the centre round
which all other interests revolved has simply and
purely disappeared; coalitions which were once the
most serious occupation of statesmen now exist only
in the speculations of the expounders of prophecy.
Among all the elements of affinity and repulsion
that regulate the combinations of nations, dogmatic
influences which were once supreme can scarcely be
said to exist. There is a change here reaching down
into the most fundamental impulses of the human
mind. "Until the seventeenth century every mental
discussion, which philosophy pronounces to be essential
to legitimate research, was almost uniformly
branded as a sin, and a large proportion of the most
deadly intellectual vices were deliberately inculcated
as virtues."</p>
<p>Anyone who argued that the differences between
Catholics and Protestants were not such as force
could settle, and that the time would come when man
would realize this truth, and regard a religious war
between European States as a wild and unimaginable
anachronism, would have been put down as a futile
doctrinaire, completely ignoring the most elementary
facts of "unchanging human nature."</p>
<p>There is one striking incident of the religious
struggle of States which illustrates vividly the change
which has come over the spirit of man. For nearly
two hundred years Christians fought the Infidel for
the conquest of the Holy Sepulchre. All the nations
of Europe joined in this great endeavor. It seemed
to be the one thing which could unite them, and for
generations, so profound was the impulse which
produced the movement, the struggle went on.
There is nothing in history, perhaps, quite comparable
to it. Suppose that during this struggle one
had told a European statesman of that age that the
time would come when, assembled in a room, the
representatives of a Europe, which had made itself
the absolute master of the Infidel, could by a single
stroke of the pen secure the Holy Sepulchre for all
time to Christendom, but that, having discussed
the matter cursorily twenty minutes or so, they
would decide that on the whole it was not worth
while! Had such a thing been told to a mediæval
statesman, he would certainly have regarded the
prophecy as that of a madman. Yet this, of course,
is precisely what has taken place.<a id="FNanchor_58_58"/><a href="#Footnote_58_58">[58]</a></p>
<p>A glance over the common incidents of Europe's
history will show the profound change which has
visibly taken place, not only in the minds, but in the
hearts of men. Things which even in our stage of
civilization would no longer be possible, owing to
that change in human nature which the military
dogmatist denies, were commonplace incidents with
our grandfathers. Indeed, the modifications in the
religious attitude just touched on assuredly arise
from an emotional as much as from an intellectual
change. A theology which could declare that the
unborn child would suffer eternal torment in the fires
of hell for no crime, other than that of its conception,
would be in our day impossible on merely emotional
grounds.<a id="FNanchor_59_59"/><a href="#Footnote_59_59">[59]</a> What was once deemed a mere truism
would now be viewed with horror and indignation.
Again, as Lecky says, "For a great change has
silently swept over Christendom. Without disturbance,
an old doctrine has passed away from among
the realizations of mankind."</p>
<p>Not only in the religious sphere do we see this
progress. In a civilization, which was in many
respects an admirable one, it was possible for 400
slaves to be slaughtered because one of them had
committed some offence; for a lady of fashion to
gratify a momentary caprice by ordering a slave to be
crucified; and, a generation or two since, for whole
populations to turn torture into a public amusement<a id="FNanchor_60_60"/><a href="#Footnote_60_60">[60]</a>
and a public festival; for kings, historically yesterday,
to assist personally at the tortures of persons
accused of witchcraft. It is related by Pitcairn,
in his "Criminal Trials of Scotland," that James I.
of Scotland personally presided over the tortures of
one, Dr. Fian, accused of having caused a storm
at sea. The bones of the prisoner's legs were
broken into small pieces in the boot, and it was
the King himself who suggested the following variation
and witnessed the execution of it: the nails
of both hands were seized by a pair of pincers and
torn from the fingers, and into the bleeding stump
of each finger two needles were thrust up to their
heads!</p>
<p>Does anyone seriously contend that the conditions
of modern life have not modified psychology in these
matters? Does anyone seriously deny that our
wider outlook, which is the result of somewhat larger
conceptions and wider reading, has wrought such a
change that the repetition of things like these in
London, or in Edinburgh, or in Berlin, has become
impossible?</p>
<p>Or, is it seriously argued that we may witness a
repetition of these events, that we are quite capable
at any moment of taking pleasure in burning alive a
beautiful child? Does the Catholic or the Protestant
really stand in danger of such things from his religious
rival? If human nature is unchanged by the progress
of ideas, then he does, and Europe's general adoption
of religious freedom is a mistake, and each sect should
arm against the other in the old way, and the only
real hope of religious peace and safety is in the
domination of an absolutely universal Church. This
was, indeed, the plea of the old inquisitor, just as it
is the plea of the <i>Spectator</i> to-day, that the only hope
of political peace is in the domination of an absolutely
universal power:</p>
<blockquote><p>There is only one way to end war and preparation for
war, and that is, as we have said, by a universal monarchy.
If we can imagine one country—let us say Russia
for the sake of argument—so powerful that she could
disarm the rest of the world, and then maintain a force
big enough to forbid any Power to invade the rights
of any other Power ... no doubt we should have
universal peace.<a id="FNanchor_61_61"/><a href="#Footnote_61_61">[61]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>This dictum recalls one, equally emphatic, once
voiced by a colleague of the late Procurator of the
Holy Synod in Russia, who said:</p>
<blockquote><p>There is only one way to ensure religious peace in the
State, to compel all in that State to conform to the State
religion. Those that will not conform must, in the
interests of peace, be driven out.</p></blockquote>
<p>Mr. Lecky, who of all authors has written most
suggestively, perhaps, on the disappearance of religious
persecution, has pointed out that the strife
between opposing religious bodies arose out of a
religious spirit which, though often high-minded
and disinterested (he protests with energy against
the notion that persecution as a whole was dictated
by interested motives), was unpurified by rationalism;
and he adds that the irrationality which once
characterized the religious sentiment has now been
replaced by the irrationality of patriotism. Mr.
Lecky says:</p>
<blockquote><p>If we take a broad view of the course of history, and
examine the relations of great bodies of men, we find that
religion and patriotism are the chief moral influences to
which they have been subjected, and that the separate
modifications and mutual interaction of these two agents
may almost be said to constitute the moral history of
mankind.</p></blockquote>
<p>Is it to be expected that the rationalization and
humanization which have taken place in the more
complex domain of religious doctrine and belief will
not also take place in the domain of patriotism?
More especially, as the same author points out, since
it was the necessities of material interest which
brought about the reform in the first domain, and
since "not only does interest, as distinct from passion,
gain a greater empire with advancing civilization,
but passion itself is mainly guided by its power."</p>
<p>Have we not abundant evidence, indeed, that the
passion of patriotism, as divorced from material
interest, is being modified by the pressure of material
interest? Are not the numberless facts of national
interdependence, which I have indicated here, pushing
inevitably to that result? And are we not justified
in concluding that, just as the progress of rationalism
has made it possible for the various religious groups
to live together, to exist side by side without physical
conflict; just as there has been in that domain no
necessary choice between universal domination or
unending strife, so in like manner will the progress of
political rationalism mark the evolution of the relationship
of political groups; that the struggle for
domination will cease because it will be realized that
physical domination is futile, and that instead of
either universal strife or universal domination there
will come, without formal treaties or Holy Alliances,
the general determination for each to go his way
undisturbed in his political allegiance, as he is now
undisturbed in his religious allegiance?</p>
<p>Perhaps the very strongest evidence that the
whole drift of human tendencies is away from such
conflict as is represented by war between States is to
be found in the writings of those who declare war to
be inevitable. Among the writers quoted in the
first chapter of this section, there is not one who, if
his arguments are examined carefully, does not show
that he realizes, consciously, or subconsciously, that
man's disposition to fight, far from being unchanged,
is becoming rapidly enfeebled. Take, for instance,
one of the latest works voicing the philosophy that
war is inevitable; that, indeed, it is both wicked and
childish to try to prevent it.<a id="FNanchor_62_62"/><a href="#Footnote_62_62">[62]</a> Notwithstanding that
the inevitability of war is the thesis of his book,
Homer Lea entitles the first section "The Decline
of Militancy," and shows clearly, in fact, that the
commercial activities of the world lead directly away
from war.</p>
<blockquote><p>Trade, ducats, and mortgages are regarded as far
greater assets and sources of power than armies or
navies. They produce national effeminacy and effeteness.</p></blockquote>
<p>Now, as this tendency is common to all nations of
Christendom—indeed, of the world—since commercial
and industrial development is world-wide,
it necessarily means, if it is true of any one nation,
that the world as a whole is drifting away from the
tendency to warfare.</p>
<p>A large part of Homer Lea's book is a sort of
Carlylean girding at what he terms "protoplasmic
gourmandizing and retching" (otherwise the busy
American industrial and social life of his countrymen).
He declares that, when a country makes
wealth, production, and industries its sole aim, it becomes
"a glutton among nations, vulgar, swinish,
arrogant"; "commercialism, having seized hold of the
American people, overshadows it, and tends to destroy
not only the aspirations and world-wide career
open to the nation, but the Republic itself." "Patriotism
in the true sense" (<i>i.e.</i>, the desire to go
and kill other people) Homer Lea declares almost
dead in the United States. The national ideals, even
of the native-born American, are deplorably low:</p>
<blockquote><p>There exists not only individual prejudice against
military ideals, but public antipathy; antagonism of
politicians, newspapers, churches, colleges, labor unions,
theorists, and organized societies. They combat the
military spirit as if it were a public evil and a national
crime.</p></blockquote>
<p>In that case, what, in the name of all that is
muddleheaded, becomes of the "unchanging tendency
towards warfare"? What is all this curious
rhetoric of Homer Lea's (and I have dealt with him
at some length, because his principles if not his
language are those which characterize much similar
literature in England, France, Germany, and the
continent of Europe generally) but an admission that
the whole tendency is not, as he would have us believe,
towards war, but away from it? Here is an author
who tells us that war is to be forever inevitable, and
in the same breath that men are rapidly conceiving
not only a "slothful indifference" to fighting, but a
profound antipathy to the military ideal.</p>
<p>Of course, Homer Lea implies that this tendency
is peculiar to the American Republic, and is for that
reason dangerous to his country; but, as a matter of
fact, Homer Lea's book might be a free translation
of much nationalist literature of either France or
Germany.<a id="FNanchor_63_63"/><a href="#Footnote_63_63">[63]</a> I cannot recall a single author of either
of the four great countries who, treating of the inevitability
of war, does not bewail the falling away of his
own country from the military ideal, or, at least, the
tendency so to fall away. Thus the English journalist
reviewing in the <i>Daily Mail</i> Homer Lea's book
cannot refrain from saying:</p>
<blockquote><p>Is it necessary to point out that there is a moral in all
this for us as well as for the American? Surely almost all
that Mr. Lea says applies to Great Britain as forcibly as
to the United States. We too have lain dreaming. We
have let our ideals tarnish. We have grown gluttonous,
also.... Shame and folly are upon us as well as
upon our brethren. Let us hasten with all our energy
to cleanse ourselves of them, that we can look the future
in the face without fear.</p></blockquote>
<p>Exactly the same note dominates the literature of
an English protagonist like Mr. Blatchford, the
militarist socialist. He talks of the "fatal apathy"
of the British people. "The people," he says, breaking
out in anger at the small disposition they show
to kill other people, "are conceited, self-indulgent,
decadent, and greedy. They will shout for the
Empire, but they will not fight for it."<a id="FNanchor_64_64"/><a href="#Footnote_64_64">[64]</a> A glance
at such publications as <i>Blackwood's</i>, the <i>National
Review</i>, the London <i>Spectator</i>, the London <i>World</i>,
will reveal precisely similar outbursts.</p>
<p>Of course, Mr. Blatchford declares that the Germans
are very different, and that what Mr. Lea (in
talking of <i>his</i> country) calls the "gourmandizing and
retching" is not at all true of Germany. As a matter
of fact, however, the phrase I have quoted might
have been "lifted" from the work of any average
Pan-German, or even from more responsible quarters.
Have Mr. Blatchford and Mr. Lea forgotten that no
less a person than Prince von Bülow, in a speech made
in the Prussian Diet, used almost the words I have
quoted from Mr. Blatchford, and dwelt at length
on the self-indulgence and degeneracy, the rage for
luxury, etc., which possess modern Germany, and told
how the old qualities which had marked the founders
of the Empire were disappearing?<a id="FNanchor_65_65"/><a href="#Footnote_65_65">[65]</a></p>
<p>Indeed, do not a great part of the governing classes
of Germany almost daily bewail the infiltration of
anti-militarist doctrines among the German people,
and does not the extraordinary increase in the Socialist
vote justify the complaint?</p>
<p>A precisely analogous plea is made by the Nationalist
writer in France when he rails at the pacifist
tendencies of <i>his</i> country, and points to the contrasting
warlike activities of neighbouring nations.
A glance at a copy of practically any Nationalist or
Conservative paper in France will furnish ample
evidence of this. Hardly a day passes but that the
<i>Echo de Paris</i>, <i>Gaulois</i>, <i>Figaro</i>, <i>Journal des Débats</i>,
<i>Patrie</i>, or <i>Presse</i>, sounds this note, while one may find
it rampant in the works of such serious writers as
Paul Bourget, Faguet, Le Bon, Barrès, Brunetière,
Paul Adam, to say nothing of more popular publicists
like Deroulède, Millevoye, Drumont, etc.</p>
<p>All these advocates of war, therefore—American,
English, German, French—are at one in declaring
that foreign countries are very warlike, but that their
own country, "sunk in sloth," is drifting away from
war. As presumably they know more of their own
country than of others, their own testimony involves
mutual destruction of their own theories. They
are thus unwilling witnesses to the truth, which is
that we are all alike—English, Americans, Germans,
French—losing the psychological impulse to war,
just as we have lost the psychological impulse to kill
our neighbors on account of religious differences,
and (at least in the case of the Anglo-Saxon) to kill our
neighbors in duels for some cause of wounded vanity.</p>
<p>How, indeed, could it be otherwise? How can
modern life, with its overpowering proportion of
industrial activities and its infinitesimal proportion
of military ones, keep alive the instincts associated
with war as against those developed by peace?</p>
<p>Not only evolution, but common sense and common
observation, teaches us that we develop most
those qualities which we exercise most, which serve
us best in the occupation in which we are most
engaged. A race of seamen is not developed by
agricultural pursuits, carried on hundreds of miles
from the sea.</p>
<p>Take the case of what is reputed (quite wrongly,
incidentally) to be the most military nation in Europe—Germany.
The immense majority of adult
Germans—practically, all who make up what we
know as Germany—have never seen a battle, and
in all human probability never will see one. In forty
years eight thousand Germans have been in the field
about twelve months—against naked blacks.<a id="FNanchor_66_66"/><a href="#Footnote_66_66">[66]</a> So
that the proportion of warlike activities to peaceful
activities works out at one to hundreds of thousands.
I wish it were possible to illustrate this diagrammatically;
but it could not be done in this book,
because, if a single dot the size of a full-stop were
to be used to illustrate the expenditure of time in
actual war, I should have to fill most of the book with
dots to illustrate the time spent by the balance of the
population in peace activities.<a id="FNanchor_67_67"/><a href="#Footnote_67_67">[67]</a></p>
<p>In that case, how can we possibly expect to keep
alive warlike qualities, when all our interests and
activities—all our environments, in short—are peace-like?</p>
<p>In other words, the occupations which develop the
qualities of industry and peace are so much in excess
of those which would develop the qualities we associate
with war that that excess has almost now passed
beyond any ordinary means of visual illustration,
and has entirely passed beyond any ordinary human
capacity fully to appreciate. Peace is with us now
nearly always; war is with us rarely, yet we are told
that it is the qualities of war which will survive, and
the qualities of peace which will be subsidiary.</p>
<p>I am not forgetting, of course, the military training,
the barrack life which is to keep alive the military
tradition. I have dealt with that question in the
next chapter. It suffices for the moment to note that
that training is defended on the grounds (notably
among those who would introduce it into England)—(1)
that it ensures peace; (2) that it renders a population
more efficient in the arts of peace—that is to
say, perpetuates that condition of "slothful ease"
which we are told is so dangerous to our characters,
in which we are bound to lose the "warlike qualities,"
and which renders society still more "gourmandizing"
in Mr. Lea's contemptuous phrase, still more
"Cobdenite" in Mr. Leo Maxse's. One cannot
have it both ways. If long-continued peace is
enervating, it is mere self-stultification to plead for
conscription on the ground that it will still further
prolong that enervating condition. If Mr. Leo
Maxse sneers at industrial society and the peace
ideal—"the Cobdenite ideal of buying cheap and
selling dear"—he must not defend German conscription
(though he does) on the ground that it
renders German commerce more efficient—that, in
other words, it advances that "Cobdenite ideal."
In that case, the drift away from war will be stronger
than ever. Perhaps some of all this inconsistency
was in Mr. Roosevelt's mind when he declared that
by "war alone" can man develop those manly
qualities, etc. If conscription really does prolong
peace and increase our aptitude for the arts of peace,
then conscription itself is but a factor in man's
temperamental drift away from war, in the change
of his nature towards peace.</p>
<p>It is not because man is degenerate or swinish or
gluttonous (such language, indeed, applied as it is by
Mr. Lea to the larger and better part of the human
race, suggests a not very high-minded ill-temper at
the stubbornness of facts which rhetoric does not
affect) that he is showing less and less disposition
to fight, but because he is condemned by the real
"primordial law" to earn his bread by the sweat of
his brow, and his nature in consequence develops
those qualities which the bulk of his interests and
capacities demand and favor.</p>
<p>Finally, of course, we are told that even though
these forces are at work, they must take "thousands
of years" to operate. This dogmatism ignores the
Law of Acceleration, as true in the domain of sociology
as in that of physics, which I have touched on
at the close of the preceding chapter. The most
recent evidence would seem to show that man as a
fire-using animal dates back to the Tertiary epoch—say,
three hundred thousand years. Now, in all that
touches this discussion, man in Northern Europe (in
Great Britain, say) remained unchanged for two
hundred and ninety-eight thousand of those years.
In the last two thousand years he changed more than
in the two hundred and ninety-eight thousand preceding,
and in one hundred he has changed more,
perhaps, than in the preceding two thousand. The
comparison becomes more understandable if we resolve
it into hours. For, say, fifty years the man
was a cannibal savage or a wild animal, hunting other
wild animals, and then in the space of three months
he became John Smith of Des Moines, attending
church, passing laws, using the telephone, and so on.
That is the history of European mankind. And in
the face of it, the wiseacres talk sapiently, and lay
it down as a self-evident and demonstrable fact that
inter-State war, which, by reason of the mechanics
of our civilization, accomplishes nothing and can
accomplish nothing, will forever be unassailable because,
once man has got the habit of doing a thing,
he will go on doing it, although the reason which in
the first instance prompted it has long since disappeared—because,
in short, of the "unchangeability
of human nature."</p>
<h3>CHAPTER IV</h3>
<p>DO THE WARLIKE NATIONS INHERIT THE EARTH?</p>
<blockquote><p>The confident dogmatism of militarist writers on this subject—The
facts—The lessons of Spanish America—How conquest
makes for the survival of the unfit—Spanish method and
English method in the New World—The virtues of military
training—The Dreyfus case—The threatened Germanization
of England—"The war which made Germany great and Germans
small."</p></blockquote>
<p>The militarist authorities I have quoted in the preceding
chapter admit, therefore, and admit very
largely, man's drift, in a sentimental sense, away
from war. But that drift, they declare, is degeneration;
without those qualities which "war alone," in
Mr. Roosevelt's phrase, can develop, man will "rot
and decay."</p>
<p>This plea is, of course, directly germane to our
subject. To say that the qualities which we associate
with war, and nothing else but war, are necessary to
assure a nation success in its struggles with other
nations is equivalent to saying that those who drift
away from war will go down before those whose
warlike activity can conserve those qualities essential
to survival; and this is but another way of saying
that men must always remain warlike if they are to
survive, that the warlike nations inherit the earth;
that men's pugnacity, therefore, is the outcome of the
great natural law of survival, and that a decline of
pugnacity marks in any nation a retrogression and
not an advance in its struggle for survival. I have
already indicated (Chapter II., Part II.) the outlines
of the proposition, which leaves no escape from this
conclusion. This is the scientific basis of the proposition
voiced by the authorities I have quoted—Mr.
Roosevelt, Von Moltke, Renan, Nietzsche, and
various of the warlike clergy<a id="FNanchor_68_68"/><a href="#Footnote_68_68">[68]</a>—and it lies at the very
bottom of the plea that man's nature, in so far as it
touches the tendency of men as a whole to go to war,
does not change; that the warlike qualities are a
necessary part of human vitality in the struggle for
existence; that, in short, all that we know of the law
of evolution forbids the conclusion that man will ever
lose this warlike pugnacity, or that nations will survive
other than by the struggle of physical force.</p>
<p>The view is best voiced, perhaps, by Homer Lea,
whom I have already quoted. He says, in his
"Valor of Ignorance":</p>
<blockquote><p>As physical vigor represents the strength of man in
his struggle for existence, in the same sense military
vigor constitutes the strength of nations; ideals, laws,
constitutions are but temporary effulgences [P. 11].
The deterioration of the military force and the consequent
destruction of the militant spirit have been concurrent
with national decay [P. 24]. International disagreements
are ... the result of the primordial conditions
that sooner or later cause war ... the law of struggle,
the law of survival, universal, unalterable ... to
thwart them, to short-cut them, to circumvent them, to
cozen, to deny, to scorn, to violate them, is folly such as
man's conceit alone makes possible.... Arbitration
denies the inexorability of natural laws ... that govern
the existence of political entities [Pp. 76, 77]. Laws that
govern the militancy of a people are not of man's framing,
but follow the primitive ordinances of nature that govern
all forms of life, from simple protozoa, awash in the sea,
to the empires of man.<a id="FNanchor_69_69"/><a href="#Footnote_69_69">[69]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>I have already indicated the grave misconception
which lies at the bottom of the interpretation of the
evolutionary law here indicated. What we are concerned
with now is to deal with the facts on which
this alleged general principle is inductively based.
We have seen from the foregoing chapter that man's
nature certainly does change; the next step is to show,
from the facts of the present-day world, that the warlike
qualities do not make for survival, that the
warlike nations do not inherit the earth.</p>
<p>Which are the military nations? We generally
think of them in Europe as Germany and France, or
perhaps also Russia, Austria, and Italy. Admittedly
(<i>vide</i> all the English and American military pundits
and economists) England is the least militarized
nation in Europe, the United States perhaps in the
world. It is, above all, Germany that appeals to us
as the type of the military nation, one in which the
stern school of war makes for the preservation of the
"manly and adventurous qualities."</p>
<p>The facts want a little closer examination. What is
a career of unwarlike ease, in Mr. Roosevelt's phrase?
In the last chapter we saw that during the last forty
years eight thousand out of sixty million Germans
have been engaged in warfare during a trifle over a
year, and that against Hottentots or Hereros—a proportion
of war days per German to peace days per
German which is as one to some hundreds of thousands.
So that if we are to take Germany as the
type of the military nation, and if we are to accept
Mr. Roosevelt's dictum that by war alone can we
acquire "those virile qualities necessary to win in the
stern strife of actual life," we shall nevertheless be
doomed to lose them, for under conditions like those
of Germany how many of us can ever see war, or
can pretend to fall under its influence? As already
pointed out, the men who really give the tone to the
German nation, to German life and conduct—that is
to say, the majority of adult Germans—have never
seen a battle and never will see one. France has
done much better. Not only has she seen infinitely
more actual fighting, but her population is much more
militarized than that of Germany, 50 per cent. more,
in fact, since, in order to maintain from a population
of forty millions the same effective military force as
Germany does with sixty millions, 1½ per cent. of
the French population is under arms as against 1 per
cent. of the German.<a id="FNanchor_70_70"/><a href="#Footnote_70_70">[70]</a></p>
<p>Still more military in organization and in recent
practical experience is Russia, and more military
than Russia is Turkey, and more military than
Turkey as a whole are the semi-independent sections
of Turkey, Arabia, and Albania, and then, perhaps,
comes Morocco.</p>
<p>On the Western Hemisphere we can draw a like
table as to the "warlike, adventurous, manly, and progressive
peoples" as compared with the "peaceful,
craven, slothful, and decadent." The least warlike
of all, the nation which has had the least training in
war, the least experience of it, which has been the
least purified by it, is Canada. After that comes the
United States, and after that the best—(excuse me,
I mean, of course, the worst—<i>i.e.</i>, the least warlike)—of
the Spanish American republics like Brazil and
Argentina; while the most warlike of all, and consequently
the most "manly and progressive," are
the "Sambo" republics, like San Domingo, Nicaragua,
Colombia, and Venezuela. They are always fighting.
If they cannot manage to get up a fight between one
another, the various parties in each republic will
fight between themselves. Here we get the real
thing. The soldiers do not pass their lives in practising
the goose-step, cleaning harness, pipeclaying
belts, but in giving and taking hard pounding.
Several of these progressive republics have never
known a year since they declared their independence
from Spain in which they have not had a war. And
quite a considerable proportion of the populations
spend their lives in fighting. During the first twenty
years of Venezuela's independent existence she
fought no less than one hundred and twenty important
battles, either with her neighbors or with
herself, and she has maintained the average pretty
well ever since. Every election is a fight—none of
your "mouth-fighting," none of your craven talking-shops
for them. Good, honest, hard, manly knocks,
with anything from one to five thousand dead and
wounded left on the field. The presidents of these
strenuous republics are not poltroons of politicians,
but soldiers—men of blood and iron with a vengeance,
men after Mr. Roosevelt's own heart, all
following "the good old rule, the simple plan."
These are the people who have taken Carlyle's
advice to "shut up the talking-shops." <i>They</i> fight
it out like men; <i>they</i> talk with Gatling-guns and
Mausers. Oh, they are a very fine, manly, military
lot! If fighting makes for survival, they should
completely oust from the field Canada and the
United States, one of which has never had a real
battle for the best part of its hundred years of craven,
sordid, peaceful life, and the other of which Homer
Lea assures us is surely dying, because of its tendency
to avoid fighting.</p>
<p>Mr. Lea does not make any secret of the fact
(and if he did, some of his rhetoric would display it)
that he is out of sympathy with predominant American
ideals. He might emigrate to Venezuela, or
Colombia, or Nicaragua. He would be able to prove
to each military dictator in turn that, in converting
the country into a shambles, far from committing a
foul crime for which such dictators should be, and
are, held in execration by civilized men the world
over, they are, on the contrary, but obeying one of
God's commands in tune with all the immutable
laws of the universe. I desire to write in all seriousness,
but, to one who happens to have seen at first
hand something of the conditions which arise from a
real military conception of civilization, it is very
difficult. How does Mr. Roosevelt, who declares
that "by war alone can we acquire those virile
qualities necessary to win in the stern strife of actual
life"; how does Von Stengel, who declares that "war
is a test of a nation's health, political, physical, and
moral"; how do our militarists, who infer that the
military state is so much finer than the Cobdenite
one of commercial pursuits; how does M. Ernest
Renan, who declares that war is the condition of
progress, and that under peace we should sink to a
degree of degeneracy difficult to realize; and how do
the various English clergymen who voice a like
philosophy reconcile their creed with military Spanish
America? How can they urge that non-military industrialism,
which, with all its shortcomings, has on
the Western Continent given us Canada and the
United States, makes for decadence and degeneration,
while militarism and the qualities and instincts that
go with it have given us Venezuela and San Domingo?
Do we not all recognize that industrialism—Mr.
Lea's "gourmandizing and retching" notwithstanding—is
the one thing which will save these
military republics; that the one condition of their
advance is that they shall give up the stupid and
sordid gold-braid militarism and turn to honest
work?</p>
<p>If ever there was a justification for Herbert
Spencer's sweeping generalization that "advance to
the highest forms of man and society depends on the
decline of militancy and the growth of industrialism,"
it is to be found in the history of the South and Central
American Republics. Indeed, Spanish America
at the present moment affords more lessons than we
seem to be drawing, and, if militancy makes for
advance and survival, it is a most extraordinary
thing that all who are in any way concerned with
those countries, all who live in them and whose
future is wrapped up in them, can never sufficiently
express their thankfulness that at last there seems
to be a tendency with some of them to get away from
the blood and valor nonsense which has been their
curse for three centuries, and to exchange the military
ideal for the Cobdenite one of buying cheap and
selling dear which excites so much contempt.</p>
<p>Some years ago an Italian lawyer, a certain
Tomasso Caivano, wrote a letter detailing his
experiences and memories of twenty years' life in
Venezuela and the neighboring republics, and his
general conclusions have for this discussion a direct
relevancy. As a sort of farewell exhortation to the
Venezuelans, he wrote:</p>
<blockquote><p>The curse of your civilization is the soldier and the
soldier's temper. It is impossible for two of you, still less
for two parties, to carry on a discussion without one
wanting to fight the other about the matter in hand. You
regard it as a derogation of dignity to consider the point
of view of the other side, and to attempt to meet it, if it is
possible to fight about it. You deem that personal valor
atones for all defects. The soldier of evil character is
more considered amongst you than the civilian of good
character, and military adventure is deemed more honorable
than honest labor. You overlook the worst corruption,
the worst oppression, in your leaders if only they
gild it with military fanfaronade and declamation about
bravery and destiny and patriotism. Not until there is a
change in this spirit will you cease to be the victims of evil
oppression. Not until your general populace—your
peasantry and your workers—refuse thus to be led to
slaughter in quarrels of which they know and care
nothing, but into which they are led because they also
prefer fighting to work—not until all this happens will
those beautiful lands which are among the most fertile
on God's earth support a happy and prosperous people
living in contentment and secure possession of the fruits
of their labor.<a id="FNanchor_71_71"/><a href="#Footnote_71_71">[71]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Spanish America seems at last in a fair way to
throwing off the domination of the soldier and
awakening from these nightmares of successive
military despotisms tempered by assassination,
though, in abandoning, in Signor Caivano's words,
"military adventure for honest labor," she will
necessarily have less to do with those deeds of blood
and valor of which her history has been so full.
But those in South America who matter are not
mourning. Really they are not.<a id="FNanchor_72_72"/><a href="#Footnote_72_72">[72]</a></p>
<p>The situation can be duplicated absolutely on the
other side of the hemisphere. Change a few names,
and you get Arabia or Morocco. Listen to this from
a recent London <i>Times</i> article:<a id="FNanchor_73_73"/><a href="#Footnote_73_73">[73]</a></p>
<blockquote><p>The fact is that for many years past Turkey has
almost invariably been at war in some part or other of
Arabia.... At the present moment Turkey is actually
conducting three separate small campaigns within Arabia
or upon its borders, and a fourth series of minor operations
in Mesopotamia. The last-named movement is
against the Kurdish tribes of the Mosul district....
Another, and more important, advance is against the
truculent Muntefik Arabs of the Euphrates delta....
The fourth, and by far the largest, campaign is the unending
warfare in the province of Yemen, north of Aden,
where the Turks have been fighting intermittently for
more than a decade. The peoples of Arabia are also
indulging in conflict on their own account. The interminable
feud between the rival potentates of Nedjd,
Ibn Saud of Riadh and Ibn Rashid of Hail, has broken
out afresh, and the tribes of the coastal province of El
Katar are supposed to have plunged into the fray. The
Muntefik Arabs, not content with worrying the Turks,
are harrying the territories of Sheikh Murbarak of Koweit.
In the far south the Sultan of Shehr and Mokalla, a
feudatory of the British Government, is conducting a tiny
war against a hostile tribe in the mysterious Hadramaut.
In the west the Beduin are spasmodically menacing
certain sections of the Hedjaz Railway, which they very
much dislike.... Ten years ago the Ibn Rashids were
nominally masters of a great deal of Arabia, and grew so
aggressive that they tried to seize Koweit. The fiery
old Sheikh of Koweit marched against them, and alternately
won and lost. He had his revenge. He sent an
audacious scion of the Ibn Sauds to the old Wahabi
capital of Riadh, and by a remarkable stratagem the
youth captured the stronghold with only fifty men. The
rival parties have been fighting at intervals ever since.</p></blockquote>
<p>And so on and so on to the extent of a column. So
that what Venezuela and Nicaragua are to the American
Continent, Arabia, Albania, Armenia, Montenegro,
and Morocco are to the Eastern Hemisphere.
We find exactly the same rule—that just as one gets
away from militancy one gets towards advance and
civilization; as men lose the tendency to fight they
gain the tendency to work, and it is by working with
one another, and not by fighting against each other,
that men advance.</p>
<p>Take the progression away from militancy, and it
gives us a table something like this:</p>
<ul>
<li>Arabia and Morocco.</li>
<li>Turkish territory as a whole.</li>
<li>The more unruly Balkan States. Montenegro.</li>
<li>Russia.</li>
<li>Spain. Italy. Austria.</li>
<li>France.</li>
<li>Germany.</li>
<li>Scandinavia. Holland. Belgium.</li>
<li>England.</li>
<li>The United States.</li>
<li>Canada.</li>
</ul>
<p>Do Mr. Roosevelt, Admiral Mahan, Baron von
Stengel, Marshal von Moltke, Mr. Homer Lea, and
the English clergymen seriously argue that this list
should be reversed, and that Arabia and Turkey
should be taken as the types of progressive nations,
and England and Germany and Scandinavia as the
decadent?</p>
<p>It may be urged that my list is not absolutely
accurate, in that England, having fought more little
wars (though the conflict with the Boers, waged with
a small, pastoral people, shows how a little war may
drain a great country), is more militarized than Germany,
which has not been fighting at all. But I have
tried in a very rough fashion to arrive at the degree of
militancy in each State, and the absence of actual
fighting in the case of Germany (as in that of the
smaller States) is balanced by the fact of the military
training of her people. As I have indicated, France is
more military than Germany, both in the extent to
which her people are put through the mill of universal
military training, and by virtue of the fact that she
has done so much more small fighting than Germany
(Madagascar, Tonkin, Africa, etc.); while, of course,
Turkey and the Balkan States are still more military
in both senses—more actual fighting, more military
training.</p>
<p>Perhaps the militarist will argue that, while useless
and unjust wars make for degeneration, just wars are
a moral regeneration. But did a nation, group, tribe,
family, or individual ever yet enter into a war which
he did not think just? The British, or most of them,
believed the war against the Boers just, but most of
the authorities in favor of war in general, outside of
Great Britain, believed it unjust. Nowhere do you
find such deathless, absolute, unwavering belief in
the justice of war as in those conflicts which all
Christendom knows to be at once unjust and unnecessary.
I refer to the religious wars of Mohammedan
fanaticism.</p>
<p>Do you suppose that when Nicaragua goes to war
with San Salvador, or Costa Rica or Colombia with
Peru, or Peru with Chili, or Chili with Argentina,
they do not each and every one of them believe that
they are fighting for immutable and deathless
principles? The civilization of most of them is, of
course, as like as two peas, and there is no more
reason, except their dislike of rational thought and
hard work, why they should fight with one another,
than that Illinois should fight with Indiana, despite
Homer Lea's fine words as to the primordial character
of national differences; to one another they are as
alike, and whether San Salvador beats Costa Rica
or Costa Rica, San Salvador, does not, so far as
essentials are concerned, matter a continental. But
their rhetoric of patriotism—the sacrifice, and the
deathless glory, and the rest of it—is often just as
sincere as ours. That is the tragedy of it, and it is
that which gives to the solution of the problem in
Spanish America its real difficulty.</p>
<p>But even if we admit that warfare <i>à l'espagnole</i> may
be degrading, and that just wars are ennobling and
necessary to our moral welfare, we should nevertheless
be condemned to degeneracy and decline.
A just war implies that someone must act unjustly
towards us, but as the general condition improves—as
it is improving in Europe as compared with Central
and South America, or Morocco, or Arabia—we shall
get less and less "moral purification"; as men become
less and less disposed to make unjustifiable attacks,
they will become more and more degenerate. In
such incoherence are we landed by the pessimistic and
impossible philosophy that men will decay and die
unless they go on killing each other.</p>
<p>What is the fundamental error at the base of the
theory that war makes for the survival of the fit—that
warfare is any necessary expression of the law of
survival? It is the illusion induced by the hypnotism
of a terminology which is obsolete. The same
factor which leads us so astray in the economic
domain leads us astray in this also.</p>
<p>Conquest does not make for the elimination of the
conquered; the weakest do not go to the wall, though
that is the process which those who adopt the formula
of evolution in this matter have in their minds.</p>
<p>Great Britain has conquered India. Does that
mean that the inferior race is replaced by the superior?
Not the least in the world; the inferior race not
only survives, but is given an extra lease of life by
virtue of the conquest. If ever the Asiatic threatens
the white race, it will be thanks in no small part to
the work of race conservation which England's
conquests in the East have involved. War, therefore,
does not make for the elimination of the unfit and
the survival of the fit. It would be truer to say that
it makes for the survival of the unfit.</p>
<p>What is the real process of war? You carefully
select from the general population on both sides the
healthiest, sturdiest, the physically and mentally
soundest, those possessing precisely the virile and
manly qualities which you desire to preserve, and,
having thus selected the élite of the two populations,
you exterminate them by battle and disease, and
leave the worst of both sides to amalgamate in the
process of conquest or defeat—because, in so far as
the final amalgamation is concerned, both processes
have the same result—and from this amalgam of the
worst of both sides you create the new nation or the
new society which is to carry on the race. Even
supposing the better nation wins, the fact of conquest
results only in the absorption of the inferior qualities
of the beaten nation—inferior presumably because
beaten, and inferior because we have killed off their
selected best and absorbed the rest, since we no
longer exterminate the women, the children, the old
men, and those too weak or too feeble to go into the
army.<a id="FNanchor_74_74"/><a href="#Footnote_74_74">[74]</a></p>
<p>You have only to carry on this process long enough
and persistently enough to weed out completely from
both sides the type of man to whom alone we can look
for the conservation of virility, physical vigor, and
hardihood. That such a process did play no small
rôle in the degeneration of Rome and the populations
on which the crux of the Empire reposed there can
hardly be any reasonable doubt. And the process
of degeneration on the part of the conqueror is aided
by this additional factor: If the conqueror profits
much by his conquest, as the Romans in one sense
did, it is the conqueror who is threatened by the
enervating effect of the soft and luxurious life; while
it is the conquered who is forced to labor for the
conqueror, and learns in consequence those qualities
of steady industry which are certainly a better moral
training than living upon the fruits of others, upon
labor extorted at the sword's point. It is the conqueror
who becomes effete, and it is the conquered
who learns discipline and the qualities making for
a well-ordered State.</p>
<p>To say of war, therefore, as does Baron von Stengel,
that it destroys the frail trees, leaving the sturdy oaks
standing, is merely to state with absolute confidence
the exact reverse of the truth; to take advantage of
loose catch-phrases, which by inattention not only
distort common thought in these matters, but often
turn the truth upside down. Our everyday ideas
are full of illustrations of the same thing. For
hundreds of years we talked of the "riper wisdom of
the ancients," implying that this generation is the
youth in experience, and that the early ages had the
accumulated experience—the exact reverse, of course,
of the truth. Yet "the learning of the ancients" and
"the wisdom of our forefathers" was a common catch-phrase,
even in the British Parliament, until an
English country parson killed this nonsense by
ridicule.<a id="FNanchor_75_75"/><a href="#Footnote_75_75">[75]</a></p>
<p>I do not urge that the somewhat simple, elementary,
selective process which I have described accounts in
itself for the decadence of military Powers. That is
only a part of the process; the whole of it is somewhat
more complicated, in that the process of elimination
of the good in favor of the bad is quite as much sociological
as biological; that is to say, if during long
periods a nation gives itself up to war, trade languishes,
the population loses the habit of steady
industry, government and administration become
corrupt, abuses escape punishment, and the real
sources of a people's strength and expansion dwindle.
What has caused the relative failure and decline of
Spanish, Portuguese, and French expansion in Asia
and the New World, and the relative success of
English expansion therein? Was it the mere hazards
of war which gave to Great Britain the domination of
India and half of the New World? That is surely a
superficial reading of history. It was, rather, that
the methods and processes of Spain, Portugal, and
France were military, while those of the Anglo-Saxon
world were commercial and peaceful. Is it not a
commonplace that in India, quite as much as in the
New World, the trader and the settler drove out the
soldier and the conqueror? The difference between
the two methods was that one was a process of conquest,
and the other of colonizing, or non-military
administration for commercial purposes. The one
embodied the sordid Cobdenite idea, which so excites
the scorn of the militarists, and the other the lofty
military ideal. The one was parasitism; the other
co-operation.<a id="FNanchor_76_76"/><a href="#Footnote_76_76">[76]</a></p>
<p>Those who confound the power of a nation with the
size of its army and navy are mistaking the check-book
for the money. A child, seeing its father paying
bills in checks, assumes that you need only plenty of
check-books in order to have plenty of money; it
does not see that for the check-book to have power
there must be unseen resources on which to draw.
Of what use is domination unless there be individual
capacity, social training, industrial resources, to
profit thereby? How can you have these things if
energy is wasted in military adventure? Is not the
failure of Spain explicable by the fact that she failed
to realize this truth? For three centuries she
attempted to live upon conquest, upon the force of
her arms, and year after year got poorer in the process
and her modern social renaissance dates from the
time when she lost the last of her American colonies.
It is since the loss of Cuba and the Philippines that
Spanish national securities have doubled in value.
(At the outbreak of the Hispano-American War
Spanish Fours were at 45; they have since touched
par.) If Spain has shown in the last decade a social
renaissance, not shown perhaps for a hundred and
fifty years, it is because a nation still less military
than Germany, and still more purely industrial, has
compelled Spain once and for all to surrender all
dreams of empire and conquest. The circumstances
of the last surrender are eloquent in this connection as
showing how even in warfare itself the industrial
training and the industrial tradition—the Cobdenite
ideal of militarist scorn—are more than a match for
the training of a society in which military activities
are predominant. If it be true that it was the German
schoolmaster who conquered at Sedan, it was the
Chicago merchant who conquered at Manila. The
writer happens to have been in touch both with
Spaniards and Americans at the time of the war, and
well remembers the scorn with which the Spaniards
referred to the notion that the Yankee pork-butchers
could possibly conquer a nation of their military
tradition, and to the idea that tradesmen would ever
be a match for the soldiery and pride of old Spain.
And French opinion was not so very different.<a id="FNanchor_77_77"/><a href="#Footnote_77_77">[77]</a>
Shortly after the war I wrote in an American journal
as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>Spain represents the outcome of some centuries devoted
mainly to military activity. No one can say that she has
been unmilitary or at all deficient in those qualities which
we associate with soldiers and soldiering. Yet, if such
qualities in any way make for national efficiency, for the
conservation of national force, the history of Spain is
absolutely inexplicable. In their late contest with
America, Spaniards showed no lack of the distinctive
military virtues. Spain's inferiority—apart from deficiency
of men and money—was precisely in those qualities
which industrialism has bred in the unmilitary
American. Authentic stories of wretched equipment,
inadequate supplies, and bad leadership show to what
depths of inefficiency the Spanish service, military and
naval, had fallen. We are justified in believing that a
much smaller nation than Spain, but one possessing a
more industrial and less military training, would have
done much better, both as regards resistance to America
and the defence of her own colonies. The present position
of Holland in Asia seems to prove this. The Dutch,
whose traditions are industrial and non-military for the
most part, have shown greater power and efficiency as a
nation than the Spanish, who are more numerous.</p>
<p>Here, as always, it is shown that, in considering
national efficiency, even as expressed in military power,
the economic problem cannot be divorced from the
military, and that it is a fatal mistake to suppose that
the power of a nation depends solely upon the power of
its public bodies, or that it can be judged simply from the
size of its army. A large army may, indeed, be a sign of a
national—that is, military—weakness. Warfare in these
days is a business like other activities, and no courage, no
heroism, no "glorious past," no "immortal traditions,"
will atone for deficient rations and fraudulent administration.
Good civilian qualities are the ones that will in
the end win a nation's battles. The Spaniard is the last
one in the world to see this. He talks and dreams of
Castilian bravery and Spanish honor, and is above
shopkeeping details.... A writer on contemporary
Spain remarks that any intelligent middle-class Spaniard
will admit every charge of incompetence which can be
brought against the conduct of public affairs. "Yes, we
have a wretched Government. In any other country
somebody would be shot." This is the hopeless military
creed: killing somebody is the only remedy.</p></blockquote>
<p>Here we see a trace of that intellectual legacy which
Spain has left to the New World, and which has
stamped itself so indelibly on the history of Spanish
America. On a later occasion in this connection I
wrote as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>To appreciate the outcome of much soldiering, the
condition in which persistent military training may leave
a race, one should study Spanish America. Here we
have a collection of some score of States, all very much
alike in social and political make-up. Most of the
South American States so resemble one another in
language, laws, institutions, that to an outsider it would
seem not to matter a straw under which particular six-months-old
republic one should live; whether one be
under the Government of the pronunciamento-created
President of Colombia, or under that of the President of
Venezuela, one's condition would appear to be much the
same. Apparently no particular country has anything
which differentiates it from another, and, consequently,
anything to protect against the other. Actually, the
Governments might all change places and the people be
none the wiser. Yet, so hypnotized, are these little
States by the "necessity for self-protection," by the
glamour of armaments, that there is not one without a
relatively elaborate and expensive military establishment
to protect it from the rest.</p>
<p>No conditions seem so propitious for a practical confederation
as those of Spanish America; with a few
exceptions, the virtual unity of language, laws, general
race-ideals, would seem to render protection of frontiers
supererogatory. Yet the citizens give untold wealth,
service, life, and suffering to be protected against a
Government exactly like their own. All this waste of
life and energy has gone on without it ever occurring to
one of these States that it would be preferable to be
annexed a thousand times over, so trifling would be the
resulting change in their condition, than continue the
everlasting and futile tribute of blood and treasure.
Over some absolutely unimportant matter—like that of
the Patagonian roads, which nearly brought Argentina
and Chili to grips the other day—as much patriotic
devotion will be expended as ever the Old Guard lavished
in protecting the honor of the Tricolor. Battles will
be fought which will make all the struggles in South
Africa appear mean in comparison. Actions in which the
dead are counted in thousands will excite no more
comment in the world than that produced by a skirmish
in Natal, in which a score of yeomen are captured and
released.<a id="FNanchor_78_78"/><a href="#Footnote_78_78">[78]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>In the decade since the foregoing was written
things have enormously improved in South America.
Why? For the simple reason, as pointed out in
Chapter V. of the first part of this book, that Spanish
America is being brought more and more into the
economic movement of the world; and with the
establishment of factories, in which large capital
has been sunk, banks, businesses, etc., the whole
attitude of mind of those interested in these ventures
is changed. The Jingo, the military adventurer, the
fomentor of trouble, are seen for what they are—not
as patriots, but as representing exceedingly
mischievous and maleficent forces.</p>
<p>This general truth has two facets: if long warfare
diverts a people from the capacity for industry, so in
the long run economic pressure—the influences, that
is, which turn the energies of people to preoccupation
with social well-being—is fatal to the military tradition.
Neither tendency is constant; warfare produces
poverty; poverty pushes to thrift and work,
which result in wealth; wealth creates leisure and
pride and pushes to warfare.</p>
<p>Where Nature does not respond readily to industrial
effort, where it is, at least apparently, more
profitable to plunder than to work, the military
tradition survives. The Beduin has been a bandit
since the time of Abraham, for the simple reason that
the desert does not support industrial life nor respond
to industrial effort. The only career offering a
fair apparent return for effort is plunder. In Morocco,
in Arabia, in all very poor pastoral countries, the
same phenomenon is exhibited; in mountainous
countries which are arid and are removed from the
economic centres, <i>idem</i>. The same may have been
to some extent the case in Prussia before the era of
coal and iron; but the fact that to-day 99 per cent.
of the population is normally engaged in trade and
industry, and 1 per cent. only in military preparation,
and some fraction too small to be properly estimated
engaged in actual war, shows how far she has outgrown
such a state—shows, incidentally, what little
chance the ideal and tradition represented by 1 per
cent. or some fractional percentage has against
interests and activities represented by 99 per cent.
The recent history of South and Central America,
because it is recent, and because the factors are less
complicated, illustrates best the tendency with which
we are dealing. Spanish America inherited the
military tradition in all its vigor. As I have already
pointed out, the Spanish occupation of the American
Continent was a process of conquest rather than of
colonizing; and while the mother country got poorer
and poorer by the process of conquest, the new
countries also impoverished themselves in adherence
to the same fatal illusion. The glamour of conquest
was, of course, Spain's ruin. So long as it was possible
for her to live on extorted bullion, neither social nor
industrial development seemed possible. Despite
the common idea to the contrary, Germany has
known how to keep this fatal hypnotism at bay, and,
far from allowing her military activities to absorb
her industrial, it is precisely the military activities
which are in a fair way now to being absorbed by the
industrial and commercial, and her world commerce
has its foundation, not in tribute or bullion exacted
at the sword's point, but in sound and honest exchange.
So that to-day the legitimate commercial
tribute which Germany, who never sent a soldier
there, exacts from Spanish America is immensely
greater than that which goes to Spain, who poured
out blood and treasure during three centuries on these
territories. In this way, again, do the warlike
nations inherit the earth!</p>
<p>If Germany is never to duplicate Spain's decadence,
it is precisely because (1) she has never had, historically,
Spain's temptation to live by conquest, and
(2) because, having to live by honest industry, her
commercial hold, even upon the territories conquered
by Spain, is more firmly set than that of Spain herself.</p>
<p>How may we sum up the whole case, keeping in
mind every empire that ever existed—the Assyrian,
the Babylonian, the Mede and Persian, the Macedonian,
the Roman, the Frank, the Saxon, the
Spanish, the Portuguese, the Bourbon, the Napoleonic?
In all and every one of them we may see the
same process, which is this: If it remains military it
decays; if it prospers and takes its share of the work
of the world it ceases to be military. There is no
other reading of history.</p>
<p>That history furnishes no justification for the plea
that pugnacity and antagonism between nations is
bound up in any way with the real process of national
survival, shows clearly enough that nations nurtured
normally in peace are more than a match for nations
nurtured normally in war; that communities of non-military
tradition and instincts, like the Anglo-Saxon
communities of the New World, show elements
of survival stronger than those possessed by communities
animated by the military tradition, like the
Spanish and Portuguese nations of the New World;
that the position of the industrial nations in Europe as
compared with the military gives no justification for
the plea that the warlike qualities make for survival.
It is clearly evident that there is no biological justification
in the terms of man's political evolution for
the perpetuation of antagonism between nations, nor
any justification for the plea that the diminution of
such antagonism runs counter to the teachings of the
"natural law." There is no such natural law; in
accordance with natural laws, men are being thrust
irresistibly towards co-operation between communities
and not towards conflict.</p>
<p>There remains the argument that, though the
conflict itself may make for degeneration, the preparation
for that conflict makes for survival, for the
improvement of human nature. I have already
touched upon the hopeless confusion which comes of
the plea that, while long-continued peace is bad,
military preparations find justification in that they
insure peace.</p>
<p>Almost every defence of militarism includes a
sneer at the ideal of peace because it involves the
Cobdenite state of buying cheap and selling dear.
But, with equal regularity, the advocate of the
military system goes on to argue for great armaments,
not as a means of promoting war, that valuable
school, etc., but as the best means of securing peace;
in other words, that condition of "buying cheap and
selling dear" which but a moment before he has
condemned as so defective. As though to make the
stultification complete, he pleads for the peace value
of military training, on the ground that German
commerce has benefited from it—that, in other
words, it has promoted the "Cobdenite ideal."
The analysis of the reasoning, as has been brilliantly
shown by Mr. John M. Robertson,<a id="FNanchor_79_79"/><a href="#Footnote_79_79">[79]</a> gives a result
something like this: (1) War is a great school of
morals, therefore we must have great armaments to
insure peace; (2) to secure peace engenders the Cobdenite
ideal, which is bad, therefore we should adopt
conscription, (<i>a</i>) because it is the best safeguard of
peace, (<i>b</i>) because it is a training for commerce—the
Cobdenite ideal.</p>
<p>Is it true that barrack training—the sort of school
which the competition of armaments during the last
generation has imposed on the people of Continental
Europe—makes for moral health? Is it likely that a
"perpetual rehearsal for something never likely to
come off, and when it comes off is not like the rehearsal,"
should be a training for life's realities? Is
it likely that such a process would have the stamp
and touch of closeness to real things? Is it likely
that the mechanical routine of artificial occupations,
artificial crimes, artificial virtues, artificial punishments
should form any training for the battle of real
life?<a id="FNanchor_80_80"/><a href="#Footnote_80_80">[80]</a> What of the Dreyfus case? What of the
abominable scandals that have marked German
military life of late years? If peace military training
is such a fine school, how could the London <i>Times</i>
write thus of France after she had submitted to a
generation of a very severe form of it:</p>
<blockquote><p>A thrill of horror and shame ran through the whole
civilized world outside France when the result of the
Rennes Court-Martial became known.... By their
(the officers') own admission, whether flung defiantly at
the judges, their inferiors, or wrung from them under
cross-examination, Dreyfus's chief accusers were convicted
of gross and fraudulent illegalities which, anywhere,
would have sufficed, not only to discredit their
testimony—had they any serious testimony to offer—but
to transfer them speedily from the witness-box to the
prisoner's dock.... Their vaunted honor "rooted in
dishonor stood." ... Five judges out of the seven have
once more demonstrated the truth of the astounding
axiom first propounded during the Zola trial, that "military
justice is not as other justice." ... We have no
hesitation in saying that the Rennes Court-Martial constitutes
in itself the grossest, and, viewed in the light
of the surrounding circumstances, the most appalling
prostitution of justice which the world has witnessed in
modern times.... Flagrantly, deliberately, mercilessly
trampled justice underfoot.... The verdict, which is
a slap in the face to the public opinion of the civilized
world, to the conscience of humanity.... France is
henceforth on her trial before history. Arraigned at the
bar of a tribunal far higher than that before which Dreyfus
stood, it rests with her to show whether she will undo
this great wrong and rehabilitate her fair name, or
whether she will stand irrevocably condemned and disgraced
by allowing it to be consummated. We can less
than ever afford to underrate the forces against truth
and justice.... Hypnotized by the wild tales perpetually
dinned into all credulous ears of an international
"syndicate of treason," conspiring against the honor of
the army and the safety of France, the conscience of the
French nation has been numbed, and its intelligence
atrophied.... Amongst those statesmen who are in
touch with the outside world in the Senate and Chamber
there must be some that will remind her that nations, no
more than individuals, cannot bear the burden of universal
scorn and live.... France cannot close her
ears to the voice of the civilized world, for that voice is the
voice of history.<a id="FNanchor_81_81"/><a href="#Footnote_81_81">[81]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>And what the <i>Times</i> said then all England was saying,
and not only all England, but all America.</p>
<p>And has Germany escaped a like condemnation?
We commonly assume that the Dreyfus case could
not be duplicated in Germany. But this is not the
opinion of very many Germans themselves. Indeed,
just before the Dreyfus case reached its crisis, the
Kotze scandal—in its way just as grave as the Dreyfus
affair, and revealing a moral condition just as
serious—prompted the London <i>Times</i> to declare that
"certain features of German civilization are such as
to make it difficult for Englishmen to understand how
the whole State does not collapse from sheer rottenness."
If that could be said of the Kotze affair,
what shall be said of the state of things which has
been revealed by Maximilien Harden among others?</p>
<p>Need it be said that the writer of these lines does
not desire to represent Germans as a whole as more
corrupt than their neighbors? But impartial observers
are not of opinion, and very many Germans
are not of opinion, that there has been either economic,
social, or moral advantage to the German
people from the victories of 1870 and the state of
regimentation which the sequel has imposed. This
is surely evidenced by the actual position of affairs
in the German Empire, the complex difficulty with
which the German people are now struggling, the
growing discontent, the growing influence of those
elements which are nurtured in discontent, the
growth on one side of radical intransigence and on
the other of almost feudal autocracy, the failure to
effect normally and easily those democratic developments
which have been effected in almost every other
European State, the danger for the future which
such a situation represents, the precariousness of
German finance, the relatively small profit which her
population as a whole has received from the greatly
increased foreign trade—all this, and much more,
confirms that view. England has of late seemed to
have been affected with the German superstition.
With the curious perversity that marks "patriotic"
judgments, the whole tendency of the English has
been to make comparisons with Germany to the
disadvantage of themselves and of other European
countries. Yet if Germans themselves are to be
believed, much of that superiority which the English
see in Germany is as purely non-existent as the
phantom German war-balloon to which the British
Press devoted serious columns, to the phantom army
corps in Epping Forest, to the phantom stories of
arms in London cellars, and to the German spy
which English patriots see in every Italian waiter.<a id="FNanchor_82_82"/><a href="#Footnote_82_82">[82]</a></p>
<p>Despite the hypnotism which German "progress"
seems to exercise on the minds of English Jingoes, the
German people themselves, as distinct from the small
group of Prussian Junkers, are not in the least
enamored of it, as is proved by the unparalleled
growth of the social-democratic element, which is the
negation of military imperialism, and which, as the
figures in Prussia prove, receives support not from
one class of the population merely, but from the
mercantile, industrial, and professional classes as
well. The agitation for electoral reform in Prussia
shows how acute the conflict has become; on the one
side the increasing democratic element showing more
and more of a revolutionary tendency, and on the
other side the Prussian autocracy showing less and
less disposition to yield. Does anyone really believe
that the situation will remain there, that the Democratic
parties will continue to grow in numbers and
be content for ever to be ridden down by the "booted
Prussian," and that German democracy will indefinitely
accept a situation in which it will be always
possible—in the words of the Junker, von Oldenburg,
member of the Reichstag—for the German Emperor
to say to a Lieutenant, "Take ten men and close the
Reichstag"?</p>
<p>What must be the German's appreciation of the
value of military victory and militarization when,
mainly because of it, he finds himself engaged in a
struggle which elsewhere less militarized nations
settled a generation since? And what has the English
defender of the militarist regimen, who holds
the German system up for imitation, to say of it as a
school of national discipline, when the Imperial
Chancellor himself defends the refusal of democratic
suffrage like that obtaining in England on the ground
that the Prussian people have not yet acquired those
qualities of public discipline which make it workable
in England?<a id="FNanchor_83_83"/><a href="#Footnote_83_83">[83]</a></p>
<p>Yet what Prussia, in the opinion of the Chancellor,
is not yet fit for, Scandinavian nations, Switzerland,
Holland, Belgium, have fitted themselves for without
the aid of military victory and subsequent regimentation.
Did not someone once say that the war had
made Germany great and Germans small?</p>
<p>When we ascribe so large a measure of Germany's
social progress (which no one, so far as I know, is concerned
to deny) to the victories and regimentation,
why do we conveniently overlook the social progress
of the small States which I have just mentioned,
where such progress on the material side has certainly
been as great as, and on the moral side greater than,
in Germany? Why do we overlook the fact that, if
Germany has done well in certain social organizations,
Scandinavia and Switzerland have done better?
And why do we overlook the fact that, if regimentation
is of such social value, it has been so completely
inoperative in States which are more highly militarized
even than Germany—in Spain, Italy, Austria,
Turkey, and Russia?</p>
<p>But even assuming—a very large assumption—that
regimentation has played the rôle in German
progress which English Germano-maniacs would
have us believe, is there any justification for supposing
that a like process would be in any way adaptable
to English conditions social, moral, material, and
historical?</p>
<p>The position of Germany since the war of 1870—what
it has stood for in the generation since victory,
and what it stood for in the generations that followed
defeat—furnishes a much-needed lesson as to the
outcome of the philosophy of force. Practically all
impartial observers of Germany are in agreement
with Mr. Harbutt Dawson when he writes as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>It is questionable whether unified Germany counts as
much to-day as an intellectual and moral agent in the
world as when it was little better than a geographical
expression.... Germany has at command an apparently
inexhaustible reserve of physical and material
force, but the real influence and power which it exerts is
disproportionately small. The history of civilization is
full of proofs that the two things are not synonymous. A
nation's mere force is, on ultimate analysis, its sum of
brute strength. This force may, indeed, go with intrinsic
power, yet such power can never depend permanently on
force, and the test is easy to apply.... No one who
genuinely admires the best in the German character, and
who wishes well to the German people, will seek to
minimize the extent of the loss which would appear to
have befallen the old national ideals; hence the discontent
of the enlightened classes with the political laws under
which they live—a discontent often vague and indefinite,
the discontent of men who do not know clearly what is
wrong or what they want, but feel that a free play is
denied them which belongs to the dignity and worth and
essence of human personality.</p></blockquote>
<p>"Is there a German culture to-day?" asks Fuchs.<a id="FNanchor_84_84"/><a href="#Footnote_84_84">[84]</a>
"We Germans are able to perfect all works of civilizing
power as well as, and indeed better than, the best
in other nations. Yet nothing that the heroes of
labor execute goes beyond our own border." And
the most extraordinary thing is that those who do
not in the least deny this condition to which Germany
has fallen—who, indeed, exaggerate it, and ask us
with triumph to look upon the brutality of German
method and German conception—ask us to go and
follow Germany's example!</p>
<p>Most British pro-armament agitation is based
upon the plea that Germany is dominated by a
philosophy of force. They point to books like those
of General Bernhardi, idealizing the employment of
force, and then urge a policy of replying by force—and
force only—which would, of course, justify in
Germany the Bernhardi school, and by the reaction
of opposing forces stereotype the philosophy in
Europe and make it part of the general European
tradition. England stands in danger of becoming
Prussianized by virtue of the fact of fighting Prussianism,
or rather by virtue of the fact that, instead of
fighting it with the intellectual tools that won religious
freedom in Europe, she insists upon confining her
efforts to the tools of physical force.</p>
<p>Some of the acutest foreign students of English
progress—men like Edmond Demolins—ascribe it
to the very range of qualities which the German
system is bound to crush; their aptitude for initiative,
their reliance upon their own efforts, their sturdy
resistance to State interference (already weakening),
their impatience with bureaucracy and red tape (also
weakening), all of which is wrapped up with general
rebelliousness to regimentation.</p>
<p>Though the English base part of the defence of
armaments on the plea that, economic interest apart,
they desire to live their own life in their own way, to
develop in their own fashion, do they not run some
danger that with this mania for the imitation of
German method they may Germanize England,
though never a German soldier land on their soil?</p>
<p>Of course, it is always assumed that, though the
English may adopt the French and German system of
conscription, they could never fall a victim to the
defects of those systems, and that the scandals which
break out from time to time in France and Germany
could never be duplicated by <i>their</i> barrack system,
and that the military atmosphere of their own
barracks, the training in their own army, would
always be wholesome. But what do even its defenders
say?</p>
<p>Mr. Blatchford himself says:<a id="FNanchor_85_85"/><a href="#Footnote_85_85">[85]</a></p>
<blockquote><p>Barrack life is bad. Barrack life will always be bad.
It is never good for a lot of men to live together apart
from home influences and feminine. It is not good for
women to live or work in communities of women. The
sexes react upon each other; each provides for the other
a natural restraint, a wholesome incentive.... The
barracks and the garrison town are not good for young
men. The young soldier, fenced and hemmed in by a
discipline unnecessarily severe, and often stupid, has at
the same time an amount of license which is dangerous
to all but those of strong good sense and strong will. I
have seen clean, good, nice boys come into the Army and
go to the devil in less than a year. I am no Puritan. I
am a man of the world; but any sensible and honest man
who has been in the Army will know at once that what I
am saying is entirely true, and is the truth expressed
with much restraint and moderation. A few hours in a
barrack-room would teach a civilian more than all the
soldier stories ever written. When I joined the Army I
was unusually unsophisticated for a boy of twenty. I
had been brought up by a mother. I had attended
Sunday-school and chapel. I had lived a quiet, sheltered
life, and I had an astonishing amount to learn. The
language of the barrack-room shocked me, appalled me.
I could not understand half I heard; I could not credit
much that I saw. When I began to realize the truth, I
took my courage in both hands and went about the world
I had come into with open eyes. So I learnt the facts,
but I must not tell them.<a id="FNanchor_86_86"/><a href="#Footnote_86_86">[86]</a></p></blockquote>
<h3>CHAPTER V</h3>
<p>THE DIMINISHING FACTOR OF PHYSICAL FORCE: PSYCHOLOGICAL RESULTS</p>
<blockquote><p>Diminishing factor of physical force—Though diminishing, physical
force has always had an important rôle in human affairs—What
is underlying principle, determining advantageous
and disadvantageous use of physical force?—Force that aids
co-operation in accord with law of man's advance: force that
is exercised for parasitism in conflict with such law and
disadvantageous for both parties—Historical process of the
abandonment of physical force—The Khan and the London
tradesman—Ancient Rome and modern Britain—The sentimental
defence of war as the purifier of human life—The
facts—The redirection of human pugnacity.</p></blockquote>
<p>Despite the general tendency indicated by the facts
dealt with in the preceding chapter, it will be urged
(with perfect justice) that, though the methods of
Anglo-Saxondom as compared with those of the
Spanish, Portuguese, and French Empires, may have
been mainly commercial and industrial rather than
military, war was a necessary part of expansion; that
but for some fighting the Anglo-Saxons would have
been ousted from North America or Asia, or would
never have gained a footing there.</p>
<p>Does this, however, prevent us establishing, on the
basis of the facts exposed in the preceding chapter,
a general principle sufficiently definite to serve as a
practical guide in policy, and to indicate reliably a
general tendency in human affairs? Assuredly not.
The principle which explains the uselessness of much
of the force exerted by the military type of empire,
and justifies in large part that employed by Britain, is
neither obscure nor uncertain, although empiricism,
rule of thumb (which is the curse of political thinking
in our days, and more than anything else stands in
the way of real progress), gets over the difficulty
by declaring that no principle in human affairs can
be pushed to its logical or theoretical conclusion;
that what may be "right in theory" is wrong in
practice.</p>
<p>Thus Mr. Roosevelt, who expresses with such
admirable force and vigor the average thoughts of his
hearers or readers, takes generally this line: We must
be peaceful, but not too peaceful; warlike, but not too
warlike; moral, but not too moral.<a id="FNanchor_87_87"/><a href="#Footnote_87_87">[87]</a></p>
<p>By such verbal mystification we are encouraged to
shirk the rough and stony places along the hard road
of thinking. If we cannot carry a principle to its logical
conclusion, at what point are we to stop? One
will fix one and another will fix another with equal
justice. What is it to be "moderately" peaceful, or
"moderately" warlike? Temperament and predilection
can stretch such limitations indefinitely.
This sort of thing only darkens counsel.</p>
<p>If a theory is right, it can be pushed to its logical
conclusion; indeed, the only real test of its value is
that it <i>can</i> be pushed to its logical conclusion. If it is
wrong in practice, it is wrong in theory, for the right
theory will take cognizance of all the facts, not only of
one set.</p>
<p>In Chapter II. of this part (pp. 186-192), I have
very broadly indicated the process by which the
employment of physical force in the affairs of the
world has been a constantly diminishing factor since
the day that primitive man killed his fellow-man in
order to eat him. Yet throughout the whole process
the employment of force has been an integral part of
progress, until even to-day in the most advanced
nations force—the police-force—is an integral part
of their civilization.</p>
<p>What, then, is the principle determining the advantageous
and the disadvantageous employment of
force?</p>
<p>Preceding the outline sketch just referred to is
another sketch indicating the real biological law of
man's survival and advance; the key to that law
is found in co-operation between men and struggle
with nature. Mankind as a whole is the organism
which needs to co-ordinate its parts in order to
insure greater vitality by better adaptation to its
environment.</p>
<p>Here, then, we get the key: force employed to
secure completer co-operation between the parts, to
facilitate exchange, makes for advance; force which
runs counter to such co-operation, which attempts
to replace the mutual benefit of exchange by compulsion,
which is in any way a form of parasitism, makes
for retrogression.</p>
<p>Why is the employment of force by the police justified?
Because the bandit refuses to co-operate. He
does not offer an exchange; he wants to live as a
parasite, to take by force, and give nothing in
exchange. If he increased in numbers, co-operation
between the various parts of the organism would be
impossible; he makes for disintegration. He must
be restrained, and so long as the police use their force
in such restraint they are merely insuring co-operation.
The police are not attempting to settle things
by force; they are preventing things from being
settled in that way.</p>
<p>Now, suppose that this police-force becomes the
army of a political Power, and the diplomats of that
Power say to a smaller one: "We outnumber you;
we are going to annex your territory, and you are
going to pay us tribute." And the smaller Power
says: "What are you going to give us for that tribute?"
And the larger replies: "Nothing. You
are weak; we are strong; we gobble you up. It is the
law of life; always has been—always will be to the
end."</p>
<p>Now that police-force, become an army, is no
longer making for co-operation; it has simply and
purely taken the place of the bandits; and to approximate
such an army to a police-force, and to say that
because both operations involve the employment of
force they both stand equally justified, is to ignore
half the facts, and to be guilty of those lazy generalizations
which we associate with savagery.<a id="FNanchor_88_88"/><a href="#Footnote_88_88">[88]</a></p>
<p>But the difference is more than a moral one. If
the reader will again return to the little sketch
referred to above, he will probably agree that the
diplomats of the larger Power are acting in an extraordinarily
stupid fashion. I say nothing of their
sham philosophy (which happens, however, to be that
of European statecraft to-day), by which this
aggression is made to appear in keeping with the law
of man's struggle for life, when, as a matter of fact,
it is the very negation of that law; but we know <i>now</i>
that they are taking a course which gives the least
result, even from <i>their</i> point of view, for the effort
expended.</p>
<p>Here we get the key also to the difference between
the respective histories of the military empires, like
Spain, France, and Portugal, and the more industrial
type, like England, which has been touched upon in
the preceding chapter. Not the mere hazard of war,
not a question of mere efficiency in the employment
of force, has given to Great Britain influence in half
a world, and taken it from Spain, but a radical, fundamental
difference in underlying principles however
imperfectly realized. England's exercise of force
has approximated on the whole to the rôle of police;
Spain's to that of the diplomats of the supposititious
Power just referred to. England's has made for co-operation;
Spain's for the embarrassment of co-operation.
England's has been in keeping with the
real law of man's struggle; Spain's in keeping with
the sham law which the "blood and iron" empiricists
are forever throwing at our heads. For what has
happened to all attempts to live on extorted tribute?
They have all failed—failed miserably and utterly<a id="FNanchor_89_89"/><a href="#Footnote_89_89">[89]</a>—to
such an extent that to-day the exaction of tribute
has become an economic impossibility.</p>
<p>If, however, our supposititious diplomats, instead
of asking for tribute, had said: "Your country is in
disorder; your police-force is insufficient; our merchants
are robbed and killed; we will lend you police
and help you to maintain order; you will pay the police
their just wage, and that is all;" and had honestly
kept to this office, their exercise of force would have
aided human co-operation, not checked it. Again,
it would have been a struggle, not against man, but
against the use of force; the "predominant Power"
would have been living, not on other men, but by
more efficient organization of man's fight with nature.</p>
<p>That is why, in the first section of this book, I
have laid emphasis on the truth that the justification
of past wars has no bearing on the problem which
confronts us: the precise degree of fighting which was
necessary a hundred and fifty years ago is a somewhat
academic problem. The degree of fighting which is
necessary to-day is the problem which confronts us,
and a great many factors have been introduced into it
since England won India and lost part of North
America. The face of the world has changed, and
the factors of conflict have changed radically: to
ignore that is to ignore facts and to be guided by the
worst form of theorizing and sentimentalism—the
theorizing that will not recognize the facts. England
does not need to maintain order in Germany, nor
Germany in France; and the struggle between those
nations is no part of man's struggle with nature—has
no justification in the real law of human struggle;
it is an anachronism; it finds its justification in a sham
philosophy that will not bear the test of facts, and,
responding to no real need and achieving no real purpose,
is bound with increasing enlightenment to come
to an end.</p>
<p>I wish it were not everlastingly necessary to reiterate
the fact that the world has moved. Yet for the
purposes of this discussion it is necessary. If to-day
an Italian warship were suddenly to bombard Liverpool
without warning, the Bourse in Rome would
present a condition, and the bank-rate in Rome would
take a drop that would ruin tens of thousands of
Italians—do far more injury, probably, to Italy than
to England. Yet if five hundred years ago Italian
pirates had landed from the Thames and sacked
London itself, not an Italian in Italy would have been
a penny the worse for it.</p>
<p>Is it seriously urged that in the matter of the
exercise of physical force, therefore, there is no difference
in these two conditions: and is it seriously urged
that the psychological phenomena which go with the
exercise of physical force are to remain unaffected?</p>
<p>The preceding chapter is, indeed, the historical
justification of the economic truths established in the
first section of this book in the terms of the facts of
the present-day world, which show that the predominating
factor in survival is shifting from the physical
to the intellectual plane. This evolutionary process
has now reached a point in international affairs
which involves the complete economic futility of
military force. In the last chapter but one I dealt
with the psychological consequence of this profound
change in the nature of man's normal activities, showing
that his nature is coming more and more to adapt
itself to what he normally and for the greater part of
his life—in most cases all his life—is engaged in, and
is losing the impulses concerned with an abnormal
and unusual occupation.</p>
<p>Why have I presented the facts in this order, and
dealt with the psychological result involved in this
change before the change itself? I have adopted
this order of treatment because the believer in war
justifies his dogmatism for the most part by an
appeal to what he alleges is the one dominating fact of
the situation—<i>i.e.</i>, that human nature is unchanging.
Well, as will be seen from the chapter on that subject,
that alleged fact does not bear investigation.
Human nature is changing out of all recognition.
Not only is man fighting less, but he is using all forms
of physical compulsion less, and as a very natural
result is losing those psychological attributes that
go with the employment of physical force. And he
is coming to employ physical force less because
accumulated evidence is pushing him more and more
to the conclusion that he can accomplish more easily
that which he strives for by other means.</p>
<p>Few of us realize to what extent economic pressure—and
I use that term in its just sense, as meaning,
not only the struggle for money, but everything
implied therein, well-being, social consideration, and
the rest—has replaced physical force in human
affairs. The primitive mind could not conceive a
world in which everything was not regulated by
force: even the great minds of antiquity could not
believe the world would be an industrious one unless
the great mass were made industrious by the use of
physical force—<i>i.e.</i>, by slavery. Three-fourths of
those who peopled what is now Italy in Rome's
palmiest days were slaves, chained in the fields when
at work, chained at night in their dormitories, with
those who were porters chained to the doorways.
It was a society of slavery—fighting slaves, working
slaves, cultivating slaves, official slaves, and Gibbon
adds that the Emperor himself was a slave,
"the first slave to the ceremonies he imposed."
Great and penetrating as were many of the minds of
antiquity, none of them show much conception of
any condition of society in which the economic
impulse could replace physical compulsion.<a id="FNanchor_90_90"/><a href="#Footnote_90_90">[90]</a> Had
they been told that the time would come when the
world would work very much harder under the
impulse of an abstract thing known as economic
interest, they would have regarded such a statement
as that of a mere sentimental theorist. Indeed, one
need not go so far: if one had told an American
slaveholder of sixty years ago that the time would
come when the South would produce more cotton
under the free pressure of economic forces than
under slavery, he would have made a like reply.
He would probably have declared that "a good
cowhide whip beats all economic pressure"—pretty
much the sort of thing that one may hear from the
mouth of the average militarist to-day. Very
"practical" and virile, of course, but it has the disadvantage
of not being true.</p>
<p>The presumed necessity for physical compulsion
did not stop at slavery. As we have already seen, it
was accepted as an axiom in statecraft that men's
religious beliefs had to be forcibly restrained, and not
merely their religious belief, but their very clothing;
and we have hundreds of years of complicated sumptuary
laws, hundreds of years, also, of forcible control
or, rather, the attempted forcible control of prices
and trade, the elaborate system of monopolies,
absolute prohibition of the entrance into the country
of certain foreign goods, the violation of which
prohibition was treated as a penal offence. We had
even the use of forced money, the refusal to accept
which was treated as a penal offence. In many
countries for years it was a crime to send gold
abroad, all indicating the domination of the mind of
man by the same curious obsession that man's life
must be ruled by physical force, and it is only very
slowly and very painfully that we have arrived at
the truth that men will work best when left to unseen
and invisible forces. A world in which physical
force was withdrawn from the regulation of men's
labor, faith, clothes, trade, language, travel, would
have been absolutely inconceivable to even the
best minds during the three or four thousand years
of history which mainly concern us. What is the
central explanation of the profound change involved
here—the shifting of the pivot in all human affairs, in
so far as they touch both the individual and the
community, from physical ponderable forces to
economic imponderable forces? It is surely that,
strange as it may seem, the latter forces accomplish
the desired result more efficiently and more readily
than do the former, which even when they are not
completely futile are in comparison wasteful and
stultifying. It is the law of the economy of effort.
Indeed, the use of physical force usually involves in
those employing it the same limitation of freedom
(even if in lesser degree) as that which it is desired to
impose. Herbert Spencer illustrates the process in
the following suggestive passage:</p>
<blockquote><p>The exercise of mastery inevitably entails on the master
himself some sort of slavery more or less pronounced.
The uncultured masses and even the greater part of the
cultured will regard this statement as absurd, and though
many who have read history with an eye to essentials
rather than to trivialities know that this is a paradox in
the right sense—that is, true in fact though not seeming
true—even they are not fully conscious of the mass of
evidence establishing it, and will be all the better for having
illustrations recalled. Let me begin with the earliest
and simplest which serves to symbolize the whole.</p>
<p>Here is a prisoner, with his hands tied and a cord round
his neck (as suggested by figures in Assyrian bas-reliefs),
being led home by his savage conqueror, who intends to
make him a slave. The one you say is captive and the
other free. Are you quite sure the other is free? He
holds one end of the cord and, unless he means his captive
to escape, he must continue to be fastened by keeping
hold of the cord in such way that it cannot easily be
detached. He must be himself tied to the captive while
the captive is tied to him. In other ways his activities
are impeded and certain burdens are imposed on him.
A wild animal crosses the track and he cannot pursue.
If he wishes to drink of the adjacent stream he must tie
up his captive, lest advantage be taken of his defenceless
position. Moreover, he has to provide food for both.
In various ways he is no longer, then, completely at
liberty; and these worries adumbrate in a simple manner
the universal truth that the instrumentalities by which
the subordination of others is effected themselves subordinate
the victor, the master, or the ruler.<a id="FNanchor_91_91"/><a href="#Footnote_91_91">[91]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Thus it comes that all nations attempting to live by
conquest end by being themselves the victims of a
military tyranny precisely similar to that which they
hope to inflict; or, in other terms, that the attempt to
impose by force of arms a disadvantageous commercial
situation to the advantage of the conqueror ends
in the conqueror's falling a victim to the very disadvantages
from which he hoped by a process of
spoliation to profit.</p>
<p>But the truth that economic force always in the
long run outweighs physical or military force is
illustrated by the simple fact of the universal use of
money—the fact that the use of money is not a thing
which we choose or can shake off, but a thing imposed
by the operation of forces stronger than our volition,
stronger than the tyranny of the cruellest tyrant who
ever reigned by blood and iron. I think it is one of
the most astounding things, to the man who takes
a fairly fresh mind to the study of history, that the
most absolute despots—men who can command the
lives of their subjects with a completeness and a
nonchalance of which the modern Western world
furnishes no parallel—cannot command money.
One asks oneself, indeed, why such an absolute ruler,
able as he is by the sheer might of his position and by
the sheer force of his power to take everything that
exists in his kingdom, and able as he is to exact every
sort and character of service, needs money, which is
the means of obtaining goods or services by a freely
consented exchange. Yet, as we know, it is precisely,
in ancient as in modern times, the most absolute
despot who is often the most financially embarrassed.<a id="FNanchor_92_92"/><a href="#Footnote_92_92">[92]</a>
Is not this a demonstration that in reality
physical force is operative in only very narrow limits?
It is no mere rhetoric, but the cold truth, to say that
under absolutism it is a simple thing to get men's
lives, but often impossible to get money. And the
more, apparently, that physical force was exercised,
the more difficult did the command of money become.
And for a very simple reason—a reason which reveals
in rudimentary form that principle of the economic
futility of military power with which we are dealing.
The phenomenon is best illustrated by a concrete
case. If one go to-day into one of the independent
despotisms of Central Asia one will find generally a
picture of the most abject poverty. Why? Because
the ruler has absolute power to take wealth whenever
he sees it, to take it by any means whatever—torture,
death—up to the completest limit of uncontrolled
physical force. What is the result? The wealth is
not created, and torture itself cannot produce a thing
which is non-existent. Step across the frontier into a
State under British or Russian protection, where the
Khan has some sort of limits imposed on his powers.
The difference is immediately perceptible: evidence of
wealth and comfort in relative profusion, and, other
things being equal, the ruler, whose physical force
over his subjects is limited, is a great deal richer
than the ruler whose physical force over his subjects
is unlimited. In other words, the farther one gets
away from physical force, in the acquisition of wealth,
the greater is the result for the effort expended. At
the one end of the scale you get the despot in rags,
exercising sway over what is probably a potentially
rich territory, reduced to having to kill a man by
torture in order to obtain a sum which at the other
end of the scale a London tradesman will spend on a
restaurant dinner for the purpose of sitting at table
with a duke—or the thousandth part of the sum
which the same tradesman will spend in philanthropy
or otherwise, for the sake of acquiring an empty title
from a monarch who has lost all power of exercising
any physical force whatsoever.</p>
<p>Which process, judged by all things that men
desire, gives the better result, the physical force of
blood and iron which we see, or the intellectual or
psychic force which we cannot see? The principle
which operates in the limited fashion which I have
indicated, operates with no less force in the larger
domain of modern international politics. The
wealth of the world is not represented by a fixed
amount of gold or money now in the possession of one
Power, and now in the possession of another, but
depends on all the unchecked multiple activities of a
community for the time being. Check that activity,
whether by imposing tribute, or disadvantageous
commercial conditions, or an unwelcome administration
which sets up sterile political agitation,
and you get less wealth—less wealth for the conqueror,
as well as less for the conquered. The
broadest statement of the case is that all experience—especially
the experience indicated in the last
chapter—shows that in trade by free consent, carrying
mutual benefit, we get larger results for effort
expended than in the exercise of physical force, which
attempts to exact advantage for one party at the
expense of the other. I am not arguing over again
the thesis of the first part of this book; but, as we shall
see presently, the general principle of the diminishing
factor of physical force in the affairs of the world carries
with it a psychological change in human nature
which modifies radically our impulses to sheer physical
conflict. What it is important just now to keep
in mind, is the incalculable intensification of this
diminution of physical force by our mechanical
development. The principle was obviously less true
for Rome than it is for Great Britain or America:
Rome, however imperfectly, lived largely by tribute.
The sheer mechanical development of the
modern world has rendered tribute in the Roman
sense impossible. Rome did not have to create
markets and find a field for the employment of her
capital. We do. What result does this carry? Rome
could afford to be relatively indifferent to the prosperity
of her subject territory. We cannot. If the
territory is not prosperous we have no market, and we
have no field for our investments, and that is why we
are checked at every point from doing what Rome
was able to do. You can to some extent exact tribute
by force; you cannot compel a man to buy your
goods by force if he does not want them, and has not
got the money to pay for them. Now, the difference
which we see here has been brought about by the
interaction of a whole series of mechanical changes—printing,
gunpowder, steam, electricity, improved
means of communication. It is the last-named
which has mainly created the fact of credit. Now,
credit is merely an extension of the use of money, and
we can no more shake off the domination of the one
than we can that of the other. We have seen that
the bloodiest despot is himself the slave of money, in
the sense that he is compelled to employ it. In the
same way no physical force can, in the modern
world, set at nought the force of credit.<a id="FNanchor_93_93"/><a href="#Footnote_93_93">[93]</a> It is no
more possible for a great people of the modern world
to live without credit than without money, of which
it is a part. Do we not here get an illustration of the
fact that intangible economic forces are setting
at nought the force of arms?</p>
<p>One of the curiosities of this mechanical development,
with its deep-seated psychological results, is
the general failure to realize the real bearings of
each step therein. Printing was regarded, in the
first instance, as merely a new-fangled process which
threw a great many copying scribes and monks out
of employment. Who realized that in the simple
invention of printing there was the liberation of a
force greater than the power of kings? It is only here
and there that we find an isolated thinker having a
glimmering of the political bearing of such inventions
of the conception of the great truth that the
more man succeeds in his struggle with nature, the
less must be the rôle of physical force between men,
for the reason that human society has become, with
each success in the struggle against nature, a completer
organism. That is to say, that the interdependence
of the parts has been increased, and
that the possibility of one part injuring another
without injury to itself, has been diminished. Each
part is more dependent on the other parts, and the
impulses to injury, therefore, must in the nature
of things be diminished. And that fact must, and
does, daily redirect human pugnacity. And it is
noteworthy that perhaps the best service which the
improvement of the instruments of man's struggle
with nature performs is the improvement of human
relations. Machinery and the steam-engine have
done something more than make fortunes for manufacturers:
they have abolished human slavery, as
Aristotle foresaw they would. It was impossible
for men in the mass to be other than superstitious
and irrational until they had the printed book.<a id="FNanchor_94_94"/><a href="#Footnote_94_94">[94]</a>
"Roads that are formed for the circulation of wealth
become channels for the circulation of ideas, and
render possible that simultaneous action upon which
all liberty depends." Banking done by telegraphy
concerns much more than the stockbroker: it demonstrates
clearly and dramatically the real interdependence
of nations, and is destined to transform
the mind of the statesman. Our struggle is with
our environment, not with one another; and those
who talk as though struggle between the parts of the
same organism must necessarily go on, and as though
impulses which are redirected every day can never
receive the particular redirection involved in
abandoning the struggle between States, ignorantly
adopt the formula of science, but leave half the facts
out of consideration. And just as the direction of the
impulses will be changed, so will the character of the
struggle be changed; the force which we shall use for
our needs will be the force of intelligence, of hard work,
of character, of patience, self-control, and a developed
brain, and pugnacity and combativeness which,
instead of being used up and wasted in world conflicts
of futile destructiveness, will be, and are being,
diverted into the steady stream of rationally-directed
effort. The virile impulses become, not the tyrant
and master, but the tool and servant of the controlling
brain.</p>
<p>The conception of abstract imponderable forces
by the human mind is a very slow process. All
man's history reveals this. The theologian has
always felt this difficulty. For thousands of years
men could only conceive of evil as an animal with
horns and a tail, going about the world devouring
folk; abstract conceptions had to be made understandable
by a crude anthropomorphism. Perhaps
it is better that humanity should have some glimmering
of the great facts of the universe, even though
interpreted by legends of demons, and goblins, and
fairies, and the rest; but we cannot overlook the
truth that the facts are distorted in the process, and
our advance in the conception of morals is marked
largely by the extent to which we can form an abstract
conception of the fact of evil—none the less a fact
because unembodied—without having to translate it
into a non-existent person or animal with a forked
tail.</p>
<p>As our advance in the understanding of morality is
marked by our dropping these crude physical conceptions,
is it not likely that our advance in the
understanding of those social problems, which so
nearly affect our general well-being, will be marked
in like manner?</p>
<p>Is it not somewhat childish and elementary to conceive
of force only as the firing off of guns and the
launching of <i>Dreadnoughts</i>, of struggle as the physical
struggle between men, instead of the application of
man's energies to his contest with the planet? Is not
the time coming when the real struggle will inspire us
with the same respect and even the same thrill as that
now inspired by a charge in battle; especially as the
charges in battle are getting very out of date, and are
shortly to disappear from our warfare? The mind
which can only conceive of struggle as bombardment
and charges is, of course, the Dervish mind. Not
that Fuzzy-Wuzzy is not a fine fellow. He is manly,
sturdy, hardy, with a courage, and warlike qualities
generally, which no European can equal. But the
frail and spectacled English official is his master, and
a few score of such will make themselves the masters
of teeming thousands of Sudanese; the relatively unwarlike
Englishman is doing the same thing all over
Asia, and he is doing it simply by virtue of superior
brain and character, more thought, more rationalism,
more steady and controlled hard work. The
American is doing the same in the Philippines. It
may be said that it is superior armament which does
it. But what is the superior armament but the
result of superior thought and work? And even
without the superior armament the larger intelligence
would still do it; for what the Englishman and American
do, the Roman did of old, with the same arms
as the inhabitants of his vassal worlds. Force is
indeed the master, but it is the force of intelligence,
character, and rationalism.</p>
<p>I can imagine the contempt with which the man
of physical force greets the foregoing. To fight with
words, to fight with talk! No, not words, but ideas.
And something more than ideas. Their translation
into practical effort, into organization, into the
direction and administration of organization, into
the strategy and tactics of human life.</p>
<p>What, indeed, is modern warfare in its highest
phases but this? Is it not altogether out of date
and ignorant to picture soldiering as riding about
on horseback, bivouacking in forests, sleeping in
tents, and dashing gallantly at the head of shining
regiments in plumes and breastplates, and pounding
in serried ranks against the equally serried ranks of
the cruel foe, storming breaches as the "war," in
short, of Mr. Henty's books for boys? How far does
such a conception correspond to the reality—to the
German conception? Even if the whole picture
were not out of date, what proportion of the most
military nation would ever be destined to witness it
or to take part in it? Not one in ten thousand.
What is the character even of military conflict but,
for the most part, years of hard and steady work,
somewhat mechanical, somewhat divorced from
real life, but not a whit more exciting? That is true
of all ranks; and in the higher ranks of the directing
mind war has become an almost purely intellectual
process. Was it not the late W.H. Steevens who
painted Lord Kitchener as the sort of man who
would have made an admirable manager of Harrod's
Stores; who fought all his battles in his study, and
regarded the actual fighting as the mere culminating
incident in the whole process, the dirty and noisy part
of it, which he would have been glad to get away
from?</p>
<p>The real soldiers of our time—those who represent
the brain of the armies—have a life not very different
from that of men of any intellectual calling;
much less of physical strife than is called for in
many civil occupations; less than falls to the lot of
engineers, ranchers, sailors, miners, and so on. Even
with armies the pugnacity must be translated into
intellectual and not into physical effort.<a id="FNanchor_95_95"/><a href="#Footnote_95_95">[95]</a></p>
<p>The very fact that war was long an activity which
was in some sense a change and relaxation from the
more intellectual strife of peaceful life, in which work
was replaced by danger, thought by adventure,
accounted in no small part for its attraction for men.
But, as we have seen, war is becoming as hopelessly
intellectual and scientific as any other form of work:
officers are scientists, the men are workmen, the
army is a machine, battles are "tactical operations,"
the charge is becoming out of date; a little while and
war will become the least romantic of all professions.</p>
<p>In this domain, as in all others, intellectual force
is replacing sheer physical force, and we are being
pushed by the necessities even of this struggle to be
more rational in our attitude to war, to rationalize
our study of it; and as our attitude generally becomes
more scientific, so will the purely impulsive element
lose its empire over us. That is one factor; but, of
course, there is the greater one. Our respect and
admiration goes in the long run, despite momentary
setbacks, to those qualities which achieve the results
at which we are all, in common, aiming. If those
results are mainly intellectual, it is the intellectual
qualities that will receive the tribute of our admiration.
We do not make a man President because he
holds the light-weight boxing championship, and
nobody knows or cares whether Mr. Wilson or Mr.
Taft would be the better man at golf. But in a condition
of society in which physical force was still the determining
factor it would matter all in the world, and
even when other factors had obtained considerable
weight, as during the Middle Ages, physical combat
went for a great deal: the knight in his shining armor
established his prestige by his prowess in arms,
and the vestige of this still remains in those countries
that retain the duel. To some small extent—a very
small extent—a man's dexterity with sword and
pistol will affect his political prestige in Paris, Rome,
Budapest, or Berlin. But these are just interesting
vestiges, which in the case of Anglo-Saxon societies
have disappeared entirely. My commercial friend
who declares that he works fifteen hours a day
mainly for the purpose of going one better than his
commercial rival across the street, must beat that
rival in commerce, not in arms; it would satisfy no
pride of either to "have it out" in the back garden in
their shirt-sleeves. Nor is there the least danger that
one will stick a knife into the other.</p>
<p>Are all these factors to leave the national relationship
unaffected? Have they left it unaffected?
Does the military prowess of Russia or of Turkey
inspire any particular satisfaction in the minds of
the individual Russian or of the individual Turk?
Does it inspire Europe with any especial respect?
Would not most of us just as soon be a non-military
American as a military Turk? Do not, in short, all
the factors show that sheer physical force is losing its
prestige as much in the national as in the personal
relationship?</p>
<p>I am not overlooking the case of Germany. Does
the history of Germany, during the last half-century,
show the blind instinctive pugnacity which is supposed
to be so overpowering an element in international
relationship as to outweigh all question of
material interest? Does the commonly accepted
history of the trickery and negotiation which preceded
the 1870 conflict, the cool calculation of those
who swayed Germany's policy during those years,
show that subordination to the blind lust for battle
which the militarist would persuade us is always to
be an element in our international conflict? Does it
not, on the contrary, show that German destinies
were swayed by very cool and calculating motives
of interest, though interest interpreted in terms of
political and economic doctrines which the development
of the last thirty years or so has demonstrated
to be obsolete? Nor am I overlooking the
"Prussian tradition," the fact of a firmly entrenched,
aristocratic status, the intellectual legacy of pagan
knighthood and Heaven knows what else. But even
a Prussian Junker becomes less of an energumen as he
becomes more of a scientist,<a id="FNanchor_96_96"/><a href="#Footnote_96_96">[96]</a> and although German
science has of late spent its energies in somewhat arid
specialization, the influence of more enlightened conceptions
in sociology and statecraft must sooner or
later emerge from any thoroughgoing study of
political and economic problems. Of course, there
are survivals of the old temper, but can it seriously
be argued that, when the futility of physical force to
accomplish those ends towards which we are all
striving is fully demonstrated, we shall go on maintaining
war as a sort of theatrical entertainment?
Has such a thing ever happened in the past, when our
impulses and "sporting" instincts came into conflict
with our larger social and economic interests?</p>
<p>All this, in other words, involves a great deal more
than the mere change in the character of warfare. It
involves a fundamental change in our psychological
attitude thereto. Not only does it show that on every
side, even the military side, conflict must become less
impulsive and instinctive, more rational and sustained,
less the blind strife of mutually hating men,
and more and more the calculated effort to a definite
end; but it will affect the very well-springs of much of
the present defence of war.</p>
<p>Why is it that the authorities I have quoted in the
first chapter of this section—Mr. Roosevelt, Von
Moltke, Renan, and the English clergymen—sing the
praises of war as such a valuable school of morals?<a id="FNanchor_97_97"/><a href="#Footnote_97_97">[97]</a>
Do these war advocates urge that war itself is desirable?
Would they urge going to war unnecessarily
or unjustly merely because it is good for us? Emphatically
no. Their argument, in the last analysis,
resolves itself into this: that war, though bad, has
redeeming qualities, as teaching staunchness, courage,
and the rest. Well, so has cutting our legs off,
or an operation for appendicitis. Whoever composed
epics on typhoid fever or cancer? Such
advocates might object to the efficient policing of a
town because, if it was full of cut-throats, the inhabitants
would be taught courage. One can almost
imagine this sort of teacher pouring scorn upon
those weaklings who want to call upon the police for
protection, and saying, "Police are for sentimentalists
and cowards and men of slothful ease. What will
become of the strenuous life if you introduce police?"<a id="FNanchor_98_98"/><a href="#Footnote_98_98">[98]</a></p>
<p>The whole thing falls to the ground; and if we do
not compose poems about typhoid it is because
typhoid does not attract us and war does. That is
the bottom of the whole matter, and it simplifies
things a great deal to admit honestly that while no
one is thrilled by the spectacle of disease, most of us
are thrilled by the spectacle of war—that while none
of us are fascinated by the spectacle of a man struggling
with a disease, most of us are by the spectacle
of men struggling with one another in war. There is
something in warfare, in its story and in its paraphernalia,
which profoundly stirs the emotions and sends
the blood tingling through the veins of the most
peaceable of us, and appeals to I know not what
remote instincts, to say nothing of our natural
admiration for courage, our love of adventure, of
intense movement and action. But this romantic
fascination resides to no small extent in that very
spectacular quality of which modern conditions are
depriving war.</p>
<p>As we become a little more educated, we realize
that human psychology is a complex and not a simple
thing; that because we yield ourselves to the thrill of
the battle spectacle we are not bound to conclude that
the processes behind it, and the nature behind it, are
necessarily all admirable; that the readiness to die is
not the only test of virility or a fine or noble nature.</p>
<p>In the book to which I have just referred (Mr.
Steevens' "With Kitchener to Khartoum") one may
read the following:</p>
<blockquote><p>And the Dervishes? The honor of the fight must still
go with the men who died. Our men were perfect, but
the Dervishes were superb—beyond perfection. It was
their largest, best, and bravest army that ever fought
against us for Mahdism, and it died worthily for the huge
empire that Mahdism won and kept so long. Their
riflemen, mangled by every kind of death and torment
that man can devise, clung round the black flag and the
green, emptying their poor, rotten home-made cartridges
dauntlessly. Their spearmen charged death every minute
hopelessly. Their horsemen led each attack, riding
into the bullets till nothing was left.... Not one rush,
or two, or ten, but rush on rush, company on company,
never stopping, though all their view that was not
unshaken enemy was the bodies of the men who had
rushed before them. A dusky line got up and stormed
forward: it bent, broke up, fell apart, and disappeared.
Before the smoke had cleared another line was bending
and storming forward in the same track.... From the
green army there now came only death-enamored desperadoes,
strolling one by one towards the rifles, pausing
to take a spear, turning aside to recognize a corpse, then,
caught by a sudden jet of fury, bounding forward, checking,
sinking limply to the ground. Now under the
black flag in a ring of bodies stood only three men, facing
the three thousand of the Third Brigade. They folded
their arms about the staff and gazed steadily forward.
Two fell. The last Dervish stood up and filled his chest;
he shouted the name of his God and hurled his spear.
Then he stood quite still, waiting. It took him full;
he quivered, gave at the knees, and toppled with his
head on his arms and his face towards the legions of his
conquerors."</p></blockquote>
<p>Let us be honest. Is there anything in European
history—Cambronne, the Light Brigade, anything
you like—more magnificent than this? If we are
honest we shall say, No.</p>
<p>But note what follows in Mr. Steevens' narrative.
What sort of nature should we expect those savage
heroes to display? Cruel, perhaps; but at least loyal.
They will stand by their chief. Men who can die
like that will not betray him for gain. They are
uncorrupted by commercialism. Well, a few chapters
after the scene just described, one may read this:</p>
<blockquote><p>As a ruler the Khalifa finished when he rode out of
Omdurman. His own pampered Baggara horsemen
killed his herdsmen and looted the cattle that were to
feed them. Somebody betrayed the position of the
reserve camels.... His followers took to killing one
another.... The whole population of the Khalifa's
capital was now racing to pilfer the Khalifa's grain....
Wonderful workings of the savage mind! Six hours
before they were dying in regiments for their master;
now they were looting his corn. Six hours before they
were slashing our wounded to pieces; now they were
asking us for coppers.</p></blockquote>
<p>This difficulty with the soldier's psychology is not
special to Dervishes or to savages. An able and
cultivated British officer writes:</p>
<blockquote><p>Soldiers as a class are men who have disregarded the
civil standard of morality altogether. They simply
ignore it. It is no doubt why civilians fight shy of
them. In the game of life they do not play the same
rules, and the consequence is a good deal of misunderstanding,
until finally the civilian says he will not play
with Tommy any more. In soldiers' eyes lying, theft,
drunkenness, bad language, etc., are not evils at all.
They steal like jackdaws. As to language, I used to
think the language of a merchant ship's forecastle pretty
bad, but the language of Tommies, in point of profanity
and in point of obscenity, beats it hollow. This department
is a speciality of his. Lying he treats with the
same large charity. To lie like a trooper is quite a sound
metaphor. He invents all sorts of elaborate lies for the
mere pleasure of inventing them. Looting, again, is one
of his preferred joys, not merely looting for profit, but
looting for the sheer fun of the destruction.<a id="FNanchor_99_99"/><a href="#Footnote_99_99">[99]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>(Please, please, dear reader, do not say that I am
slandering the British soldier. I am quoting a
British officer, and a British officer, moreover, who is
keenly in sympathy with the person that he has just
been describing.) He adds:</p>
<blockquote><p>Are thieving, and lying, and looting, and bestial talk
very bad things? If they are, Tommy is a bad man.
But for some reason or other, since I got to know him, I
have thought rather less of the iniquity of these things
than I did before.</p></blockquote>
<p>I do not know which of the two passages that I
have quoted is the more striking commentary on the
moral influence of military training; that such training
should have the effect which Captain March
Phillips describes, or (as Mr. J.A. Hobson in his
"Psychology of Jingoism" says) that the second
judgment should be given by a man of sterling character
and culture—the judgment, that thieving, and
lying, and looting, and bestial talk do not matter.
Which fact constitutes the severer condemnation of
the ethical atmosphere of militarism and military
training? Which is the more convincing testimony
to the corrupting influences of war?<a id="FNanchor_100_100"/><a href="#Footnote_100_100">[100]</a></p>
<p>To do the soldiers justice, they very rarely raise
this plea of war being a moral training-school. "War
itself," said an officer on one occasion, "is an infernally
dirty business. But somebody has got to do
the dirty work of the world, and I am glad to think
that it is the business of the soldier to prevent rather
than to make war."</p>
<p>Not that I am concerned to deny that we owe a
great deal to the soldier. I do not know even why we
should deny that we owe a great deal to the Viking.
Neither the one nor the other was in every aspect
despicable. Both have bequeathed a heritage of
courage, sturdiness, hardihood, and a spirit of ordered
adventure; the capacity to take hard knocks and to
give them; comradeship and rough discipline—all
this and much more. It is not true to say of any
emotion that it is wholly and absolutely good, or
wholly and absolutely bad. The same psychological
force which made the Vikings destructive and cruel
pillagers made their descendants sturdy and resolute
pioneers and colonists; and the same emotional force
which turns so much of Africa into a sordid and
bloody shambles would, with a different direction and
distribution, turn it into a garden. Is it for nothing
that the splendid Scandinavian race, who have converted
their rugged and rock-strewn peninsula into a
group of prosperous and stable States, which are an
example to Europe, and have infused the great
Anglo-Saxon stock with something of their sane
but noble idealism, have the blood of Vikings in
their veins? Is there no place for the free play of all
the best qualities of the Viking and the soldier in a
world still sadly in need of men with courage enough,
for instance, to face the truth, however difficult it
may seem, however unkind to our pet prejudices?</p>
<p>There is not the least necessity for the peace advocate
to ignore facts in this matter. The race of man
loves a soldier just as boys love the pirate, and
many of us, perhaps to our great advantage, remain
in part boys our lives through. But as, growing out
of boyhood, we regretfully discover the sad fact that
we cannot be pirates, that we cannot even hunt Indians,
nor be scouts, nor even trappers, so surely the
time has come to realize that we have grown out of
soldiering. The romantic appeal of the ventures of
the old Vikings, and even later of piracy,<a id="FNanchor_101_101"/><a href="#Footnote_101_101">[101]</a> was as
great as that of war. Yet we superseded the Viking,
and we hanged the pirate, though I doubt not we
loved him while we hanged him; and I am not aware
that those who urged the suppression of piracy were
vilified, except by the pirates, as maudlin sentimentalists,
who ignored human nature, or, in Homer Lea's
phrase, as "half-educated, sick-brained visionaries,
denying the inexorability of the primordial law of
struggle." Piracy interfered seriously with the trade
and industry of those who desired to earn for themselves
as good a living as they could get, and to obtain
from this imperfect world all that it had to offer.
Piracy was magnificent, doubtless, but it was not
business. We are prepared to sing about the Viking,
but not to tolerate him on the high seas; and some of
us who are quite prepared to give the soldier his due
place in poetry and legend and romance, quite prepared
to admit, with Mr. Roosevelt and Von Moltke
and the rest, the qualities which perhaps we owe to
him, and without which we should be poor folk indeed,
are nevertheless inquiring whether the time has not
come to place him (or a good portion of him) gently
on the poetic shelf with the Viking; or at least to find
other fields for those activities which, however much
we may be attracted by them, have in their present
form little place in a world in which, though, as
Bacon has said, men like danger better than travail,
travail is bound, alas!—despite ourselves—to be our
lot.</p>
<h3>CHAPTER VI</h3>
<p>THE STATE AS A PERSON: A FALSE ANALOGY AND ITS CONSEQUENCES</p>
<blockquote><p>Why aggression upon a State does not correspond to aggression
upon an individual—Our changing conception of collective
responsibility—Psychological progress in this connection—Recent
growth of factors breaking down the homogeneous
personality of States.</p></blockquote>
<p>Despite the common idea to the contrary, we dearly
love an abstraction—especially, apparently, an abstraction
which is based on half the facts. Whatever
the foregoing chapters may have proved, they
have at least proved this: that the character of the
modern State, by virtue of a multitude of new
factors which are special to our age, is essentially and
fundamentally different from that of the ancient.
Yet even those who have great and justified authority
in this matter will still appeal to Aristotle's
conception of the State as final, with the implication
that everything which has happened since Aristotle's
time should be calmly disregarded.</p>
<p>What some of those things are, the preceding
chapters have indicated: First, there is the fact of the
change in human nature itself, bound up with the
general drift away from the use of physical force—a
drift explained by the unromantic fact that physical
force does not give so much response to expended
effort as do other forms of energy. There is an
interconnection of psychological and purely mechanical
development in all this which it is not necessary
to disentangle here. The results are evident enough.
Very rarely, and to an infinitesimal extent, do we
now employ force for the achievement of our ends.
There is still a factor, however, which remains to be
considered, and which has perhaps a more direct
bearing on the question of continued conflict between
nations than any of the other factors.</p>
<p>Conflicts between nations and international pugnacity
generally imply a conception of a State as a
homogeneous whole, having the same sort of responsibility
that we attach to a person who, hitting us,
provokes us to hit back. Now only to a very small
and rapidly diminishing extent can a State be regarded
as such a person. There may have been a
time—Aristotle's time—when this was possible; but
it is now impossible. Yet the fine-spun theories on
which are based the necessity for the use of force,
as between nations, and the proposition that the
relationship of nations can only be determined by
force, and that international pugnacity will always
be expressed by a physical struggle between nations,
all arise from this fatal analogy, which in truth
corresponds to very few of the facts.</p>
<p>Thus Professor Spenser Wilkinson, whose contributions
to this subject have such deserved weight,
implies that what will permanently render the abandonment
of force between nations impossible is the
principle that "the employment of force for the
maintenance of right is the foundation of all civilized
human life, for it is the fundamental function of the
State, and apart from the State there is no civilization,
no life worth living.... The mark of the State
is sovereignty, or the identification of force and right,
and the measure of the perfection of the State is furnished
by the completeness of this identification."</p>
<p>This, whether true or not, is irrelevant to the
matter in hand. Professor Spenser Wilkinson attempts
to illustrate his thesis by quoting a case
which would seem to imply that those who take their
stand against the necessity of armaments do so on the
ground that the employment of force is wicked.
There may be those who do this, but it is not necessary
to introduce the question of right. If means
other than force give the same result more easily,
with less effort to ourselves, why discuss the abstract
right? When Professor Spenser Wilkinson reinforces
the appeal to this irrelevant abstract principle by a
case which, while apparently relevant, is in truth
irrelevant, he has successfully confused the whole
issue. After quoting three verses from the fifth
chapter of Matthew, he says:<a id="FNanchor_102_102"/><a href="#Footnote_102_102">[102]</a></p>
<blockquote><p>There are those who believe, or fancy they believe,
that the words I have quoted involve the principle that
the use of force or violence between man and man or
between nation and nation is wicked. To the man who
thinks it right to submit to any violence or be killed
rather than use violence in resistance I have no reply to
make; the world cannot conquer him, and fear has no
hold upon him. But even he can carry out his doctrine
only to the extent of allowing himself to be ill-treated, as
I will now convince him. Many years ago the people
of Lancashire were horrified by the facts reported in a
trial for murder. In a village on the outskirts of Bolton
lived a young woman, much liked and respected as a
teacher in one of the Board-schools. On her way home
from school she was accustomed to follow a footpath
through a lonely wood, and here one evening her body
was found. She had been strangled by a ruffian who had
thought in this lonely place to have his wicked will of her.
She had resisted successfully, and he had killed her in the
struggle. Fortunately the murderer was caught, and the
facts ascertained from circumstantial evidence were confirmed
by his confession. Now the question I have to
ask the man who takes his stand on the passage quoted
from the Gospel is this: "What would have been your
duty had you been walking through that wood and came
upon the girl struggling with the man who killed her?"
This is the crucial factor which, I submit, utterly destroys
the doctrine that the use of violence is in itself wrong.
The right or wrong is not in the employment of force, but
simply in the purpose for which it is used. What the
case establishes, I think, is that to use violence in resistance
to violent wrong is not only right, but necessary.</p></blockquote>
<p>The above presents, very cleverly, the utterly
false analogy with which we are dealing. Professor
Spenser Wilkinson's cleverness, indeed, is a little
Machiavellian, because he approximates non-resisters
of a very extreme type to those who advocate
agreement among nations in the matter of armaments—a
false approximation, for the proportion of
those who advocate the reduction of armaments on
such grounds is so small that they can be disregarded
in this discussion. A movement which is identified
with some of the acutest minds in European affairs
cannot be disposed of by associating it with such a
theory. But the basis of the fallacy is in the approximation
of a State to a person. Now a State is not
a person, and is becoming less so every day, and
the difficulty, which Professor Spenser Wilkinson
indicates, is a doctrinaire difficulty, not a real one.
Professor Wilkinson would have us infer that a
State can be injured or killed in the same simple way
in which it is possible to kill or injure a person, and
that because there must be physical force to restrain
aggression upon persons, there must be physical force
to restrain aggression upon States; and because there
must be physical force to execute the judgment of a
court of law in the case of individuals, there must be
physical force to execute the judgment rendered by a
decision as to differences between States. All of
which is false, and arrived at by approximating a
person to a State, and disregarding the numberless
facts which render a person different from a State.</p>
<p>How do we know that these difficulties are doctrinaire
ones? It is the British Empire which supplies
the answer. The British Empire is made up in
large part of practically independent States, and
Great Britain not only exercises no control over
their acts, but has surrendered in advance any
intention of employing force concerning them.<a id="FNanchor_103_103"/><a href="#Footnote_103_103">[103]</a>
The British States have disagreements among themselves.
They may or may not refer their differences
to the British Government, but if they do, is Great
Britain going to send an army to Canada, say, to
enforce her judgment? Everyone knows that that is
impossible. Even when one State commits what is
in reality a serious breach of international comity
on another, not only does Great Britain refrain from
using force herself, but so far as she interferes at all,
it is to prevent the employment of physical force.
For years now British Indians have been subjected
to most cruel and unjust treatment in the State of
Natal.<a id="FNanchor_104_104"/><a href="#Footnote_104_104">[104]</a> The British Government makes no secret
of the fact that she regards this treatment as unjust
and cruel; were Natal a foreign State, it is conceivable
that she would employ force, but, following the
principle laid down by Sir C.P. Lucas, "whether
they are right or whether they are wrong, more
perhaps when they are wrong than when they are
right, they cannot be made amenable by force,"
the two States are left to adjust the difficulty as
best they may, without resort to force. In the
last resort the British Empire reposes upon the
expectation that its Colonies will behave as civilized
communities, and in the long run the expectation is,
of course, a well-founded one, because, if they do not
so behave, retribution will come more surely by
the ordinary operation of social and economic forces
than it could come by any force of arms.</p>
<p>The case of the British Empire is not an isolated
one. The fact is that most of the States of the world
maintain their relations one with another without
any possibility of a resort to force; half the States of
the world have no means of enforcing by arms
such wrongs as they may suffer at the hands of
other States. Thousands of Englishmen, for instance,
make their homes in Switzerland, and it has
happened that wrongs have been suffered by Englishmen
at the hands of the Swiss Government.
Would, however, the relations between the two
States, or the practical standard of protection of
British subjects in Switzerland, be any the better
were Switzerland the whole time threatened by the
might of Great Britain? Switzerland knows that
she is practically free from the possibility of the
exercise of that force, but this has not prevented her
from behaving as a civilized community towards
British subjects.</p>
<p>What is the real guarantee of the good behavior
of one State to another? It is the elaborate interdependence
which, not only in the economic sense,
but in every sense, makes an unwarrantable aggression
of one State upon another react upon the interests
of the aggressor. Switzerland has every interest in
affording an absolutely secure asylum to British
subjects; that fact, and not the might of the British
Empire, gives protection to British subjects in
Switzerland. Where, indeed, the British subject has
to depend upon the force of his Government for
protection it is a very frail protection indeed, because
in practice the use of that force is so cumbersome, so
difficult, so costly, that any other means are to be
preferred to it. When the traveller in Greece had to
depend upon British arms, great as was relatively the
force of those arms, it proved but a very frail protection.
In the same way, when physical force
was used to impose on the South American and
Central American States the observance of their
financial obligations, such efforts failed utterly and
miserably—so miserably that Great Britain finally
surrendered any attempt at such enforcement.
What other means have succeeded? The bringing of
those countries under the influence of the great economic
currents of our time, so that now property is
infinitely more secure in Argentina than it was when
British gunboats were bombarding her ports. More
and more in international relationship is the purely
economic motive—and the economic motive is only
one of several possible ones—being employed to
replace the use of physical force. Austria, the other
day, was untouched by any threat of the employment
of the Turkish army when the annexation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was consummated, but
when the Turkish population enforced a very successful
commercial boycott of Austrian goods and Austrian
ships, Austrian merchants and public opinion
made it quickly plain to the Austrian Government
that pressure of this nature could not be disregarded.</p>
<p>I anticipate the plea that while the elaborate
interconnection of economic relations renders the
employment of force as between nations unnecessary
in so far as their material interests are concerned,
those forces cannot cover a case of aggression upon
what may be termed the moral property of nations.
A critic of the first edition of this book<a id="FNanchor_105_105"/><a href="#Footnote_105_105">[105]</a> writes:</p>
<blockquote><p>The State is the only complete form in which human
society exists, and there are a multitude of phenomena
which will be found only as manifestations of human life
in the form of a society united by the political bond into
a State. The products of such society are law, literature,
art, and science, and it has yet to be shown that apart from
that form of society known as the State, the family or
education or development of character is possible. The
State, in short, is an organism or living thing which can be
wounded and can be killed, and like every other living
thing requires protection against wounding and destruction....
Conscience and morals are products of social
and not of individual life, and to say that the sole purpose
of the State is to make possible a decent livelihood is as
though a man should say that the sole object of human
life is to satisfy the interests of existence. A man cannot
live any kind of life without food, clothing, and shelter,
but that condition does not abolish or diminish the value
of the life industrial, the life intellectual, or the life
artistic. The State is the condition of all these lives,
and its purpose is to sustain them. That is why the
State must defend itself. In the ideal, the State represents
and embodies the whole people's conception of
what is true, of what is beautiful, and of what is right, and
it is the sublime quality of human nature that every
great nation has produced citizens ready to sacrifice themselves
rather than submit to an external force attempting
to dictate to them a conception other than their own of
what is right.</p></blockquote>
<p>One is, of course, surprised to see the foregoing in the
London <i>Morning Post</i>; the concluding phrase would
justify the present agitation in India or in Egypt or
Ireland against British rule. What is that agitation
but an attempt on the part of the peoples of those
provinces to resist "an external force attempting to
dictate to them a conception other than their own of
what is right"? Fortunately, however, for British
Imperialism, a people's conception of "what is true,
of what is beautiful, and of what is right," and their
maintenance of that conception, need not necessarily
have anything whatever to do with the particular
administrative conditions under which they may
live—the only thing that a conception of a "State"
predicates. The fallacy which runs through the
whole passage just quoted, and which makes it,
in fact, nonsense, is the same fallacy which dominates
the quotation that I have made from Professor
Spenser Wilkinson's book, "Britain at Bay"—namely,
the approximation of a State to a person,
the assumption that the political delimitation coincides
with the economic and moral delimitation, that
in short a State is the embodiment of "the whole
people's conception of what is true, etc." A State
is nothing of the sort. Take the British Empire.
This State embodies not a homogeneous conception,
but a series of often absolutely contradictory conceptions
of "what is true, etc."; it embodies the
Mohammedan, the Buddhist, the Copt, the Catholic,
the Protestant, the Pagan conceptions of right and
truth. The fact which vitiates the whole of this
conception of a State is that the frontiers which
define the State do not coincide with the conception of
any of those things which the London <i>Morning Post</i>
critic has enumerated; there is no such thing as
British morality as opposed to French or German
morality, or art or industry. One may, indeed,
talk of an English conception of life, because that
is a conception of life peculiar to England, but it
would be opposed to the conception of life in other
parts of the same State, in Ireland, in Scotland, in
India, in Egypt, in Jamaica. And what is true of
England is true of all the great modern States.
Every one of them includes conceptions absolutely
opposed to other conceptions in the same State, but
many of them absolutely agree with conceptions in
foreign States. The British State includes, in Ireland,
a Catholic conception in cordial agreement with the
Catholic conception in Italy, but in cordial disagreement
with the Protestant conception in Scotland, or
the Mohammedan conception in Bengal. The real
divisions of all those ideals, which the critic enumerates,
cut right across State divisions, disregarding
them entirely. Yet, again, it is only the State divisions
which military conflict has in view.</p>
<p>What was one of the reasons leading to the cessation
of religious wars between States? It was that
religious conceptions cut across the State frontiers, so
that the State ceased to coincide with the religious
divisions of Europe, and a condition of things was
brought about in which a Protestant Sweden was
allied with a Catholic France. This rendered the
conflict absurd, and religious wars became an anachronism.</p>
<p>Is not precisely the same thing taking place with
reference to the conflicting conceptions of life which
now separate men in Christendom? Have not we
in America the same doctrinal struggle which is
going on in France and Germany and Great Britain?
To take one instance—social conflict. On the one
side in each case are all the interests bound up with
order, authority, individual freedom, without reference
to the comfort of the weak, and on the other
the reconstruction of human society along hitherto
untried lines. These problems are for most men probably—are
certainly coming to be, if they are not now—much
more profound and fundamental than any
conception which coincides with or can be identified
with State divisions. Indeed, what are the conceptions
of which the divisions coincide with the
political frontiers of the British Empire, in view of
the fact that that Empire includes nearly every
race and nearly every religion under the sun? It
may be said, of course, that in the case of Germany
and Russia we have an autocratic conception of social
organization as compared with a conception based on
individual freedom in England and America. Both
Mr. Hyndman and Mr. Blatchford seem to take this
view. "To me," says the former, "it is quite evident
that if we Socialists were to achieve success we should
at once be liable to attack from without by the military
Powers," an opinion which calmly overlooks
the fact that Socialism and anti-militarism have gone
much farther and are far better organized in the
"military" States than they are in England, and
that the military Governments have all their work
cut out as it is to keep those tendencies in check
within their own borders, without quixotically undertaking
to perform the same service in other
States.</p>
<p>This conception of the State as the political embodiment
of homogeneous doctrine is due in large
part not only to the distortion produced by false
analogy, but to the survival of a terminology which
has become obsolete, and, indeed, the whole of this
subject is vitiated by those two things. The State in
ancient times was much more a personality than it
is to-day, and it is mainly quite modern tendencies
which have broken up its doctrinal homogeneity,
and that break-up has results which are of the very
first importance in their bearing upon international
pugnacity. The matter deserves careful examination.
Professor William McDougal, in his fascinating work,
"An Introduction to Social Psychology," says in the
chapter on the instinct of pugnacity:</p>
<blockquote><p>The replacement of individual by collective pugnacity
is most clearly illustrated by barbarous peoples living
in small, strongly organized communities. Within such
communities individual combat and even expressions of
personal anger may be almost completely suppressed,
while the pugnacious instinct finds itself in perpetual
warfare between communities whose relations remain
subject to no law. As a rule no material benefit is
gained, and often none is sought, in these tribal wars....
All are kept in constant fear of attack, whole villages are
often exterminated, and the population is in this way
kept down very far below the limit at which any pressure
on the means of subsistence could arise. This perpetual
warfare, like the squabbles of a roomful of quarrelsome
children, seems to be almost wholly and directly
due to the uncomplicated operation of the instinct of
pugnacity. No material benefits are sought; a few heads
and sometimes a slave or two are the only trophies gained,
and if one asks an intelligent chief why he keeps up this
senseless practice, the best reason he can give is that
unless he does so his neighbors will not respect him and
his people, and will fall upon them and exterminate
them.</p></blockquote>
<p>Now, how does such hostility as that indicated in
this passage differ from the hostility which marks
international differences in our day? In certain
very evident respects. It does not suffice that the
foreigner should be merely a foreigner for us to want
to kill him: there must be some conflict of interest.
The English are completely indifferent to the Scandinavian,
the Belgian, the Dutchman, the Spaniard,
the Austrian, and the Italian, and are supposed for
the moment to be greatly in love with the French.
The German is the enemy. But ten years ago it
was the Frenchman who was the enemy, and Mr.
Chamberlain was talking of an alliance with the
Germans—England's natural allies, he called them—while
it was for France that he reserved his attacks.<a id="FNanchor_106_106"/><a href="#Footnote_106_106">[106]</a>
It cannot be, therefore, that there is any
inherent racial hostility in English national character,
because the Germans have not changed their
nature in ten years, nor the French theirs. If to-day
the French are England's quasi-allies and the Germans
her enemies, it is simply because their respective
interests or apparent interests have modified
in the last ten years, and their political preferences
have modified with them. In other words, national
hostilities follow the exigencies of real or imagined
political interests. Surely the point need not be labored,
seeing that England has boxed the compass
of the whole of Europe in her likes and dislikes, and
poured her hatred upon the Spaniards, the Dutch, the
Americans, the Danes, the Russians, the Germans,
the French, and again the Germans, all in turn.
The phenomenon is a commonplace of individual
relationship: "I never noticed his collars were
dirty till he got in my way," said someone of a
rival.</p>
<p>The second point of difference with Professor
McDougal's savage is that when we get to grips our
conflict does not include the whole tribe; we do not,
in the Biblical fashion, exterminate men, women,
children, and cattle. Enough of the old Adam remains
for us to detest the women and children, so
that an English poet could write of the "whelps and
dams of murderous foes"; but we no longer slaughter
them.<a id="FNanchor_107_107"/><a href="#Footnote_107_107">[107]</a></p>
<p>But there is a third fact which we must note—that
Professor McDougal's nation was made up of a single
tribe entirely homogeneous. Even the fact of living
across a river was sufficient to turn another tribe into
foreigners and to involve a desire to kill them. The
development from that stage to the present has involved,
in addition to the two factors just enumerated,
this: we now include as fellow-countrymen many who
would under the old conception necessarily be foreigners,
and the process of our development, economic and
otherwise, has made of foreigners, between whom, in
Homer Lea's philosophy, there should exist this
"primordial hostility leading inevitably to war,"
one State from which all conflict of interest has disappeared
entirely. The modern State of France
includes what were, even in historical times, eighty
separate and warring States, since each of the old
Gallic cities represented a different State. In England
people have come to regard as fellow-citizens
between whom there can be no sort of conflict of
interest scores of tribes that spent their time mutually
throat-cutting at no very distant period, as
history goes. Anyone, particularly Americans, can
recognize, indeed, that profound national differences
like those which exist between the Welshman and the
Englishman, or the Scotsman and the Irishman, need
involve not only no conflict of interest, but even no
separate political existence.</p>
<p>One has heard in recent times of the gradual revival
of Nationalism, and it is commonly argued that the
principle of Nationality must stand in the way of
co-operation between States. But the facts do not
justify that conclusion for a moment. The formation
of States has disregarded national divisions altogether.
If conflicts are to coincide with national
divisions, Wales should co-operate with Brittany and
Ireland against Normandy and England; Provence
and Savoy with Sardinia against—I do not know
what French province, because in the final rearrangement
of European frontiers races and provinces have
become so inextricably mixed, and have paid so little
regard to "natural" and "inherent" divisions, that
it is no longer possible to disentangle them.</p>
<p>In the beginning the State is a homogeneous tribe
or family, and in the process of economic and social
development these divisions so far break down that a
State may include, as the British State does, not only
half a dozen different races in the mother country,
but a thousand different races scattered over various
parts of the earth—white, black, yellow, brown,
copper-colored. This, surely, is one of the great
sweeping tendencies of history—a tendency which
operates immediately any complicated economic life
is set up. What justification have we, therefore, for
saying dogmatically that a tendency to co-operation,
which has swept before it profound ethnic differences,
social and political divisions, which has been constant
from the dawn of men's attempts to live and labor
together, is to stop at the wall of modern State
divisions, which represent none of the profound
divisions of the human race, but mainly mere administrative
convenience, and embody a conception which
is being every day profoundly modified?</p>
<p>Some indication of the processes involved in this
development has already been given in the outline
sketch in Chapter II. of this section, to which the
reader may be referred. I have there attempted
to make plain that <i>pari passu</i> with the drift from
physical force towards economic inducement goes a
corresponding diminution of pugnacity, until the
psychological factor which is the exact reverse of
pugnacity comes to have more force even than the
economic one. Quite apart from any economic question,
it is no longer possible for any government to
order the extermination of a whole population, of
the women and children, in the old Biblical style.
In the same way, the greater economic interdependence
which improved means of communication have
provoked must carry with it a greater moral interdependence,
and a tendency which has broken down
profound national divisions, like those which separated
the Celt and the Saxon, will certainly break
down on the psychological side divisions which are
obviously more artificial.</p>
<p>Among the multiple factors which have entered
into the great sweeping tendency just mentioned are
one or two which stand out as most likely to have
immediate effect on the breakdown of a purely
psychological hostility embodied by merely State
divisions. One is that lessening of the reciprocal
sentiment of collective responsibility which the
complex heterogeneity of the modern State involves.
What do I mean by this sense of collective responsibility?
To the Chinese Boxer all Europeans are "foreign
devils"; between Germans, English, Russians,
there is little distinction, just as to the black in Africa
there is little differentiation between the various
white races. Even the yokel in England talks of
"them foreigners." If a Chinese Boxer is injured
by a Frenchman, he kills a German, and feels himself
avenged—they are all "foreign devils." When
an African tribe suffers from the depredations of a
Belgian trader, the next white man who comes into
its territory, whether he happens to be an Englishman
or a Frenchman, loses his life; the tribesmen
also feel themselves avenged. But if the Chinese
Boxer had our clear conception of the different
European nations, he would feel no psychological
satisfaction in killing a German because a Frenchman
had injured him. There must be in the Boxer's
mind some collective responsibility as between the
two Europeans, or in the negro's mind between the
two white men, in order to obtain this psychological
satisfaction. If that collective responsibility does
not exist, the hostility to the second white man, in
each case, is not even raised.</p>
<p>Now, our international hostilities are largely based
on the notion of a collective responsibility in each of
the various States against which our hostility is
directed, which does not, in fact, exist. There is at
the present moment great ill-feeling in England
against "the German." Now, "the German" is a
non-existent abstraction. Englishmen are angry
with the German because he is building warships,
conceivably directed against them; but a great many
Germans are as much opposed to that increase of
armament as are the English, and the desire of the
yokel to "have a go at them Germans" depends
absolutely upon a confusion just as great as—indeed,
greater than—that which exists in the mind of the
Boxer, who cannot differentiate between the various
European peoples. Mr. Blatchford commenced that
series of articles which has done so much to accentuate
this ill-feeling with this phrase:</p>
<blockquote><p>Germany is deliberately preparing to destroy the
British Empire;</p></blockquote>
<p>and later in the articles he added:</p>
<blockquote><p>Britain is disunited; Germany is homogeneous. We
are quarrelling about the Lords' Veto, Home Rule, and a
dozen other questions of domestic politics. We have a
Little Navy Party, an Anti-Militarist Party; Germany is
unanimous upon the question of naval expansion.</p></blockquote>
<p>It would be difficult to pack a more dangerous
untruth into so few lines. What are the facts?
If "Germany" means the bulk of the German people,
Mr. Blatchford is perfectly aware that he is not
telling the truth. It is not true to say of the bulk of
the German people that they are deliberately preparing
to destroy the British Empire. The bulk of
the German people, if they are represented by any
one party at all, are represented by the Social Democrats,
who have stood from the first resolutely
against any such intention. Now the facts have to
be misstated in this way in order to produce that
temper which makes for war. If the facts are correctly
stated, no such temper arises.</p>
<p>What has a particularly competent German to
say to Mr. Blatchford's generalization? Mr. Fried,
the editor of <i>Die Friedenswarte</i>, writes:</p>
<blockquote><p>There is no one German people, no single Germany....
There are more abrupt contrasts between Germans and
Germans than between Germans and Indians. Nay, the
contradistinctions within Germany are greater than those
between Germans and the units of any other foreign
nation whatever. It might be possible to make efforts
to promote good understanding between Germans and
Englishmen, between Germans and Frenchmen, to organize
visits between nation and nation; but it will be
forever impossible to set on foot any such efforts at an
understanding between German Social Democrats and
Prussian Junkers, between German Anti-Semites and
German Jews.<a id="FNanchor_108_108"/><a href="#Footnote_108_108">[108]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>The disappearance of most international hostility
depends upon nothing more intricate than the realization
of facts which are little more complex than the
geographical knowledge which enables us to see that
the anger of the yokel is absurd when he pummels a
Frenchman because an Italian has swindled him.</p>
<p>It may be argued that there never has existed in
the past this identification between a people and the
acts of its Government which rendered the hatred of
one country for another logical, yet that hatred has
arisen. That is true; but certain new factors have
entered recently to modify this problem. One is
that never in the history of the world have nations
been so complex as they are to-day; and the second
is that never before have the dominating interests
of mankind so completely cut across State divisions
as they do to-day. The third factor is that never
before has it been possible, as it is possible by our
means of communication to-day, to offset a solidarity
of classes and ideas against a presumed State
solidarity.</p>
<p>Never at any stage of the world's development has
there existed, as exists to-day, the machinery for
embodying these interests and class ideas and ideals
which cut across frontiers. It is not generally understood
how many of our activities have become
international. Two great forces have become internationalized:
Capital on the one hand, Labor and
Socialism on the other.</p>
<p>The Labor and Socialist movements have always
been international, and become more so every year.
Few considerable strikes take place in any one
country without the labor organizations of other
countries furnishing help, and very large sums have
been contributed by the labor organizations of various
countries in this way.</p>
<p>With reference to capital, it may almost be said
that it is organized so naturally internationally that
formal organization is not necessary. When the
Bank of England is in danger, it is the Bank of
France which comes automatically to its aid, even in a
time of acute political hostility. It has been my
good fortune in the last ten years to discuss these
matters with financiers on one side and labor leaders
on the other, and I have always been particularly
struck by the fact that I have found in these two
classes precisely the same attitude of internationalization.
In no department of human activity is
internationalization so complete as in finance. The
capitalist has no country, and he knows, if he be
of the modern type, that arms and conquests and
jugglery with frontiers serve no ends of his, and may
very well defeat them. But employers, as apart
from capitalists, are also developing a strong international
cohesive organization. Among the Berlin
despatches in the London <i>Times</i> of April 18, 1910, I
find the following concerning a big strike in the
building trade, in which nearly a quarter of a million
men went out. Quoting a writer in the <i>North
German Gazette</i>, the correspondent says:</p>
<blockquote><p>The writer lays stress upon the efficiency of the
employers' arrangements. He says, in particular, that it
will probably be possible to extend the lock-out to
industries associated with the building industry, especially
the cement industry, and that the employers are
completing a ring of cartel treaties, which will prevent
German workmen from finding employment in neighboring
countries, and will insure for German employers all
possible support from abroad. It is said that Switzerland
and Austria were to conclude treaties yesterday on the
same conditions as Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Holland,
and France, and that Belgium and Italy would come in,
so that there will be complete co-operation on the part of
all Germany's neighbors except Russia. In the circumstances
the men's organs rather overlabor the point
when they produce elaborate evidence of premeditation.
The <i>Vorwärts</i> proves that the employers have long been
preparing for "a trial of strength," but that is admitted.
The official organ of the employers says, in so many words,
that any intervention is useless until "the forces have
been measured in open battle."</p></blockquote>
<p>Have not these forces begun already to affect the
psychological domain with which we are now especially
dealing? Do we place national vanity, for
instance, on the same plane as individual vanity?
Have we not already realized the absurdity involved?</p>
<p>I have quoted Admiral Mahan as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>That extension of national authority over alien communities,
which is the dominant note in the world
politics of to-day, dignifies and enlarges each State and
each citizen that enters its fold.... Sentiment, imagination,
aspiration, the satisfaction of the rational and
moral faculties in some object better than bread alone,
all must find a part in a worthy motive. Like individuals,
nations and empires have souls as well as bodies.
Great and beneficent achievement ministers to worthier
contentment than the filling of the pocket.</p></blockquote>
<p>Whatever we may think of the individuals who
work disinterestedly for the benefit of backward and
alien peoples, and however their lives may be "dignified
and enlarged" by their activities, it is surely
absurd to suppose that other individuals, who take
no part in their work and who remain thousands
of miles from the scene of action, can possibly be
credited with "great and beneficent achievement."</p>
<p>A man who boasts of his possessions is not a very
pleasant or admirable type, but at least his possessions
are for his own use and do bring a tangible
satisfaction, materially as well as sentimentally.
His is the object of a certain social deference by
reason of his wealth—a deference which has not
a very high motive, if you will, but the outward
and visible signs of which are pleasing to a vain
man. But is the same in any sense true, despite
Admiral Mahan, of the individual of a big State
as compared to the individual of a small one? Does
anyone think of paying deference to the Russian
<i>mujik</i> because he happens to belong to one of the
biggest empires territorially? Does anyone think of
despising an Ibsen or a Björnsen, or any educated
Scandinavian or Belgian or Hollander, because they
happen to belong to the smallest nations in Europe?
The thing is absurd, and the notion is simply due to
inattention. Just as we commonly overlook the fact
that the individual citizen is quite unaffected materially
by the extent of his nation's territory, that the
material position of the individual Dutchman as a
citizen of a small State will not be improved by the
mere fact of the absorption of his State by the German
Empire, in which case he will become the citizen of a
great nation, so in the same way his moral position remains
unchanged; and the notion that an individual
Russian is "dignified and enlarged" each time that
Russia conquers some new Asiatic outpost, or Russifies
a State like Finland, or that the Norwegian would
be "dignified" were his State conquered by Russia
and he became a Russian, is, of course, sheer sentimental
fustian of a very mischievous order. This is
the more emphasized when we remember that the
best men of Russia are looking forward wistfully, not
to the enlargement, but to the dissolution, of the
unwieldy giant—"stupid with the stupidity of giants,
ferocious with their ferocity"—and the rise in its
stead of a multiplicity of self-contained, self-knowing
communities, "whose members will be united
together by organic and vital sympathies, and not by
their common submission to a common policeman."</p>
<p>How small and thin a pretence is all the talk of
national prestige when the matter is tested by its
relation to the individual is shown by the commonplaces
of our everyday social intercourse. In social
consideration everything else takes precedence of
nationality, even in those circles where Chauvinism
is a cult. British Royalty is so impressed with the
dignity which attaches to membership of the British
Empire that its Princes will marry into the royal
houses of the smallest and meanest States in Europe,
while they would regard marriage with a British
commoner as an unheard-of <i>mésalliance</i>. This standard
of social judgment so marks all the European
royalties that at the present time not one ruler in
Europe belongs, properly speaking, to the race
which he rules. In all social associations an analogous
rule is followed. In our "selectest" circles an
Italian, Rumanian, Portuguese, or even Turkish
noble, is received where an American tradesman
would be taboo.</p>
<p>This tendency has struck almost all authorities
who have investigated scientifically modern international
relations. Thus Mr. T. Baty, the well-known
authority on international law, writes as
follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>All over the world society is organizing itself by
strata. The English merchant goes on business to Warsaw,
Hamburg, or Leghorn; he finds in the merchants of
Italy, Germany, and Russia the ideas, the standard of
living, the sympathies, and the aversions which are
familiar to him at home. Printing and the locomotive
have enormously reduced the importance of locality. It
is the mental atmosphere of its fellows, and not of its
neighborhood, which the child of the younger generation
is beginning to breathe. Whether he reads the <i>Revue
des Deux Mondes</i> or <i>Tit-Bits</i>, the modern citizen is
becoming at once cosmopolitan and class-centred. Let
the process work for a few more years; we shall see the
common interests of cosmopolitan classes revealing
themselves as far more potent factors than the shadowy
common interests of the subjects of States. The
Argentine merchant and the British capitalist alike
regard the Trade Union as a possible enemy—whether
British or Argentine matters to them less than nothing.
The Hamburg docker and his brother of London do not
put national interests before the primary claims of caste.
International class feeling is a reality, and not even a
nebulous reality; the nebula has developed centres of
condensation. Only the other day Sir W. Runciman,
who is certainly not a Conservative, presided over a
meeting at which there were laid the foundations of an
International Shipping Union, which is intended to unite
ship-owners of whatever country in a common organization.
When it is once recognized that the real interests
of modern people are not national, but social, the results
may be surprising.<a id="FNanchor_109_109"/><a href="#Footnote_109_109">[109]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>As Mr. Baty points out, this tendency, which he
calls "stratification," extends to all classes:</p>
<blockquote><p>It is impossible to ignore the significance of the International
Congresses, not only of Socialism, but of pacificism,
of esperantism, of feminism, of every kind of art
and science, that so conspicuously set their seal upon
the holiday season. Nationality as a limiting force is
breaking down before cosmopolitanism. In directing
its forces into an international channel, Socialism will
have no difficulty whatever<a id="FNanchor_110_110"/><a href="#Footnote_110_110">[110]</a>.... We are, therefore,
confronted with a coming condition of affairs in which
the force of nationality will be distinctly inferior to the
force of class-cohesion, and in which classes will be
internationally organized so as to wield their force with
effect. The prospect induces some curious reflections.</p></blockquote>
<p>We have here, at present in merely embryonic
form, a group of motives otherwise opposed, but
meeting and agreeing upon one point: the organization
of society on other than territorial and
national divisions. When motives of such breadth
as these give force to a tendency, it may be said that
the very stars in their courses are working to the
same end.</p>
<h2>PART III</h2>
<p>THE PRACTICAL OUTCOME</p>
<h3>CHAPTER I</h3>
<p>THE RELATION OF DEFENCE TO AGGRESSION</p>
<blockquote><p>Necessity for defence arises from the existence of a motive for
attack—Platitudes that everyone overlooks—To attenuate
the motive for aggression is to undertake a work of defence.</p></blockquote>
<p>The general proposition embodied in this book—that
the world has passed out of that stage of development
in which it is possible for one civilized group
to advance its well-being by the military domination
of another—is either broadly true or broadly
false. If it is false, it can, of course, have no bearing
upon the actual problems of our time, and can have
no practical outcome; huge armaments tempered by
warfare are the logical and natural condition.</p>
<p>But the commonest criticism this book has had
to meet is that, though its central proposition is
in essence sound, it has, nevertheless, no practical
value, because—</p>
<blockquote><p>1. Armaments are for defence, not for aggression.</p>
<p>2. However true these principles may be, the
world does not recognize them and never
will, because men are not guided by reason.</p></blockquote>
<p>As to the first point. It is probable that, if we
really understood truths which we are apt to dismiss
as platitudes, many of our problems would
disappear.</p>
<p>To say, "We must take measures for defence"
is equivalent to saying, "Someone is likely to attack
us," which is equivalent to saying, "Someone has a
motive for attacking us." In other words, the basic
fact from which arises the necessity for armaments,
the ultimate explanation of European militarism, is
<i>the force of the motive making for aggression</i>. (And
in the word "aggression," of course, I include the
imposition of superior force by the <i>threat</i>, or implied
threat, of its use, as well as by its actual use.)</p>
<p>That motive may be material or moral; it may
arise from real conflict of interest, or a purely imaginary
one; but with the disappearance of prospective
aggression disappears also the need for defence.</p>
<p>The reader deems these platitudes beside the mark?</p>
<p>I will take a few sample criticisms directed at this
book. Here is the London <i>Daily Mail</i>:</p>
<blockquote><p>The bigger nations are armed, not so much because
they look for the spoils of war, as because they wish to
prevent the horrors of it; arms are for defence.<a id="FNanchor_111_111"/><a href="#Footnote_111_111">[111]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>And here is the London <i>Times</i>:</p>
<blockquote><p>No doubt the victor suffers, but who suffers most, he
or the vanquished?"<a id="FNanchor_112_112"/><a href="#Footnote_112_112">[112]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>The criticism of the <i>Daily Mail</i> was made within
three months of a "raging and tearing" big navy
campaign, all of it based on the assumption that
Germany <i>was</i> "looking for the spoils of war," the
English naval increase being thus a direct outcome of
such motives. Without it, the question of English
increase would not have arisen.<a id="FNanchor_113_113"/><a href="#Footnote_113_113">[113]</a> The only justification
for the clamor for increase was that England
was liable to <i>attack</i>; every nation in Europe justifies
its armaments in the same way; every nation
consequently believes in the universal existence of
this motive for attack.</p>
<p>The <i>Times</i> has been hardly less insistent than the
<i>Mail</i> as to the danger from German aggression;
but its criticism would imply that the motive behind
that prospective aggression is not a desire for any
political advantage or gain of any sort. Germany
apparently recognizes aggression to be, not merely
barren of any useful result whatsoever, but burdensome
and costly into the bargain; she is, nevertheless,
determined to enter upon it in order that though
she suffer, someone else will suffer more!<a id="FNanchor_114_114"/><a href="#Footnote_114_114">[114]</a></p>
<p>In common with the London <i>Daily Mail</i> and the
London <i>Times</i>, Admiral Mahan fails to understand
this "platitude," which underlies the relation of
defence to aggression.</p>
<p>Thus in his criticism of this book, he cites the position
of Great Britain during the Napoleonic era as
proof that commercial advantage goes with the
possession of preponderant military power in the
following passage:</p>
<blockquote><p>Great Britain owed her commercial superiority then
to the armed control of the sea, which had sheltered her
commerce and industrial fabric from molestation by the
enemy.</p></blockquote>
<p><i>Ergo</i>, military force has commercial value, a result
which is arrived at by this method: in deciding a case
made up of two parties you ignore one.</p>
<p>England's superiority was not due to the employment
of military force, but to the fact that she was
able to prevent the employment of military force
against her; and the necessity for so doing arose from
Napoleon's motive in threatening her. But for the
existence of this motive to aggression—moral or
material, just or mistaken—Great Britain, without
any force whatsoever, would have been more secure
and more prosperous than she was; she would not
have been spending a third of her income in war,
and her peasantry would not have been starving.</p>
<p>Of a like character to the remark of the <i>Times</i> is
the criticism of the <i>Spectator</i>, as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>Mr. Angell's main point is that the advantages
customarily associated with national independence and
security have no existence outside the popular imagination....
He holds that Englishmen would be
equally happy if they were under German rule, and that
Germans would be equally happy if they were under
English rule. It is irrational, therefore, to take any
measures for perpetuating the existing European order,
since only a sentimentalist can set any value on its
maintenance.... Probably in private life Mr. Angell
is less consistent and less inclined to preach the burglar's
gospel that to the wise man <i>meum</i> and <i>tuum</i> are but two
names for the same thing. If he is anxious to make
converts, he will do well to apply his reasoning to subjects
that come nearer home, and convince the average man
that marriage and private property are as much illusions
as patriotism. If sentiment is to be banished from
politics, it cannot reasonably be retained in morals.</p></blockquote>
<p>As the reply to this somewhat extraordinary criticism
is directly germane to what it is important to
make clear, I may, perhaps, be excused for reproducing
my letter to the <i>Spectator</i>, which was in part as
follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>How far the foregoing is a correct description of the
scope and character of the book under review may be
gathered from the following statement of fact. My
pamphlet does <i>not</i> attack the sentiment of patriotism
(unless a criticism of the duellist's conception of dignity
be considered as such); it simply does not deal with it, as
being outside the limits of the main thesis. I do <i>not</i>
hold, and there is not one line to which your reviewer
can point as justifying such a conclusion, that Englishmen
would be equally happy if they were under German rule.
I do not conclude that it is irrational to take measures for
perpetuating the existing European order. I do <i>not</i>
"expose the folly of self-defence in nations." I do <i>not</i>
object to spending money on armaments at this juncture.
On the contrary, I am particularly emphatic in declaring
that while the present philosophy is what it is, we are
bound to maintain our relative position with other Powers.
I admit that so long as there is danger, as I believe there
is, from German aggression, we must arm. I do <i>not</i>
preach a burglar's gospel, that <i>meum</i> and <i>tuum</i> are the
same thing, and the whole tendency of my book is the exact
reverse: it is to show that the burglar's gospel—which
is the gospel of statecraft as it now stands—is no longer
possible among nations, and that the difference between
<i>meum</i> and <i>tuum</i> must necessarily, as society gains in
complication, be given a stricter observance than it has
ever heretofore been given in history. I do <i>not</i> urge that
sentiment should be banished from politics, if by sentiment
is meant the common morality that guides us in
our treatment of marriage and of private property.
The whole tone of my book is to urge with all possible
emphasis the exact reverse of such a doctrine; to urge
that the morality which has been by our necessities
developed in the society of individuals must also be
applied to the society of nations as that society becomes
by virtue of our development more interdependent.</p>
<p>I have only taken a small portion of your reviewer's
article (which runs to a whole page), and I do not think
I am exaggerating when I say that nearly all of it is as
untrue and as much a distortion of what I really say as
the passage from which I have quoted. What I do
attempt to make plain is that the necessity for defence
measures (which I completely recognize and emphatically
counsel) implies on the part of someone a motive for aggression,
and that the motive arises from the (at present)
universal belief in the social and economic advantages
accruing from successful conquest.</p>
<p>I challenged this universal axiom of statecraft and
attempted to show that the mechanical development
of the last thirty or forty years, especially in the means
of communication, had given rise to certain economic
phenomena—of which re-acting bourses and the financial
interdependence of the great economic centres of the
world are perhaps the most characteristic—which render
modern wealth and trade intangible in the sense that
they cannot be seized or interfered with to the advantage
of a military aggressor, the moral being, not that
self-defence is out of date, but that aggression is, and
that when aggression ceases, self-defence will be no longer
necessary. I urged, therefore, that in these little-recognized
truths might possibly be found a way out of the
armament <i>impasse</i>; that if the accepted motive for aggression
could be shown to have no solid basis, the tension in
Europe would be immensely relieved, and the risk of
attack become immeasurably less by reason of the
slackening of the motive for aggression. I asked whether
this series of economic facts—so little realized by the
average politician in Europe, and yet so familiar to at
least a few of the ablest financiers—did not go far to
change the axioms of statecraft, and I urged re-consideration
of such in the light of these facts.</p>
<p>Your reviewer, instead of dealing with the questions
thus raised, accuses me of "attacking patriotism," of
arguing that "Englishmen would be equally happy under
German rule," and much nonsense of the same sort, for
which there is not a shadow of justification. Is this
serious criticism? Is it worthy of the <i>Spectator</i>?</p></blockquote>
<p>To the foregoing letter the <i>Spectator</i> critic rejoins
as follows:</p>
<blockquote><p>If Mr. Angell's book had given me the same impression
as that which I gain from his letter, I should have reviewed
it in a different spirit. I can only plead that I
wrote under the impression which the book actually
made on me. In reply to his "statement of fact," I
must ask your leave to make the following corrections:
(1) Instead of saying that, on Mr. Angell's showing,
Englishmen would be "equally happy" under German
rule, I ought to have said that they would be equally
well off. But on his doctrine that material well-being is
"the very highest" aim of a politician, the two terms
seem to be interchangeable. (2) The "existing European
order" rests on the supposed economic value of
political force. In opposition to this Mr. Angell maintains
"the economic futility of political force." To
take measures for perpetuating an order founded on
a futility does seem to me "irrational." (3) I never
said that Mr. Angell objects to spending money on
armaments "while the present philosophy is what it is."
(4) The stress laid in the book on the economic folly of
patriotism, as commonly understood, does seem to me
to suggest that "sentiment should be banished from
politics." But I admit that this was only an inference,
though, as I still think, a fair inference. (5) I apologize
for the words "the burglar's gospel." They have the
fault, incident to rhetorical phrases, of being more telling
than exact.</p></blockquote>
<p>This rejoinder, as a matter of fact, still reveals the
confusion which prompted the first criticism. Because
I urged that Germany could do England relatively
little harm, since the harm which she inflicted
would immediately react on German prosperity, my
critic assumes that this is equivalent to saying that
Englishmen would be as happy or as prosperous
under German rule. He quite overlooks the fact
that if Germans are convinced that they will obtain
no benefit by the conquest of the English they will
not attempt that conquest, and there will be no
question of the English living under German rule
either less or more happily or prosperously. It is not
a question of Englishmen saying, "Let the German
come," but of the German saying, "Why should we
go?" As to the critic's second point, I have expressly
explained that not the rival's real interest but what
he deems to be his real interest must be the guide to
conduct. Military force is certainly economically
futile, but so long as German policy rests on the
assumption of the supposed economic value of military
force, England must meet that force by the
only force that can reply to it.</p>
<p>Some years ago the bank in a Western mining town
was frequently subjected to "hold-ups," because it
was known that the great mining company owning
the town kept large quantities of gold there for the
payment of its workmen. The company, therefore,
took to paying its wages mainly by check on a San
Francisco bank, and by a simple system of clearances
practically abolished the use of gold in considerable
quantities in the mining town in question. The
bank was never attacked again.</p>
<p>Now, the demonstration that gold had been replaced
by books in that bank was as much a work
of defence as though the bank had spent tens of
thousands of dollars in constructing forts and earthworks,
and mounting Gatling guns around the town.
Of the two methods of defence, that of substituting
checks for gold was infinitely cheaper, and more
effective.</p>
<p>Even if the inferences which the <i>Spectator</i> reviewer
draws were true ones, which for the most part they
are not, he still overlooks one important element.
If it were true that the book involves the "folly of
patriotism," how is that in any way relevant to the
discussion, since I also urge that nations are justified
in protecting even their follies against the attack of
other nations? I may regard the Christian Scientists,
or the Seventh Day Adventists, or the Spiritualists,
as very foolish people, and to some extent
mischievous people; but were an Act of Parliament
introduced for their suppression by physical force,
I should resist such an act with all the energy of
which I was capable. In what way are the two attitudes
contradictory? They are the attitudes, I take
it, of educated men the world over. The fact has no
importance, and it hardly bears on this subject, but
I regard certain English conceptions of life bearing on
matters of law, and social habit, and political philosophy,
as infinitely preferable to the German, and if I
thought that such conceptions demanded defence
indefinitely by great armaments this book would never
have been written. But I take the view that the idea
of such necessity is based on a complete illusion, not
only because as a matter of present-day fact, and
even in the present state of political philosophy,
Germany has not the least intention of going to war
with us to change our notions in law or literature, art
or social organization, but also because if she had any
such notion it would be founded upon illusions which
she would be bound sooner or later to shed, because
German policy could not indefinitely resist the influence
of a general European attitude on such
matters any more than it has been possible for any
great and active European State to stand outside
the European movement which has condemned the
policy of attempting to impose religious belief by the
physical force of the State. And I should regard it as
an essential part of the work of defence to aid in the
firm establishment of such a European doctrine, as
much a part of the work of defence as it would be to
go on building battleships until Germany had subscribed
to it.</p>
<p>A great part of the misconception just dealt with
arises from a hazily conceived fear that ideas like
those embodied in this book must attenuate our
energy of defence, and that we shall be in a weaker
position relatively to our rivals than we were before.
But this overlooks the fact that if the progress of ideas
weakens our energies of defence, it also weakens our
rival's energy of attack, and the strength of our
relative positions is just what it was originally, with
this exception: that we have taken a step towards
peace instead of a step towards war, to which the
mere piling up of armaments, unchecked by any
other factor, must in the end inevitably lead.</p>
<p>But there is one aspect of this failure to realize the
relation of defence to aggression, which brings us
nearer to considering the bearing of these principles
upon the question of practical policy.</p>
<h3>CHAPTER II</h3>
<p>ARMAMENT, BUT NOT ALONE ARMAMENT</p>
<blockquote><p>Not the facts, but men's belief about facts, shapes their conduct—Solving
a problem of two factors by ignoring one—The fatal
outcome of such a method—The German Navy as a "luxury"—If
both sides concentrate on armament alone.</p></blockquote>
<p>"Not the facts, but men's opinions about the facts,
are what matter," one thinker has remarked. And
this is because men's conduct is determined, not necessarily
by the right conclusion from facts, but the
conclusion they believe to be right.</p>
<p>When men burned witches, their conduct was
exactly what it would have been if what they believed
to be true <i>had</i> been true. The truth made no difference
to their behavior, so long as they could not see
the truth. And so in politics. As long as Europe
is dominated by the old beliefs, those beliefs will have
virtually the same effect in politics as though they
were intrinsically sound.</p>
<p>And just as in the matter of burning witches a
change of behavior was the outcome of a change of
opinion, in its turn the result of a more scientific
investigation of the facts, so in the same way a change
in the political conduct of Europe can only come
about as the result of a change of thought; and that
change of thought will not come about so long as the
energies of men in this matter are centred only upon
perfecting instruments of warfare. It is not merely
that better ideas can only result from more attention
being given to the real meaning of facts, but that the
direct tendency of war preparation—with the suspicion
it necessarily engenders and the ill-temper to
which it almost always gives rise—is to create both
mechanical and psychological checks to improvement
of opinion and understanding. Here, for instance, is
General von Bernhardi, who has just published his
book in favor of war as the regenerator of nations,
urging that Germany should attack certain of her
enemies before they are ready to attack her. Suppose
the others reply by increasing their military
force? It suits Bernhardi entirely. For what is the
effect of this increase on the minds of Germans possibly
disposed to disagree with Bernhardi? It is to
silence them and to strengthen Bernhardi's hands.
His policy, originally wrong, has become relatively
right, because his arguments have been answered by
force. For the silence of his might-be critics will
still further encourage those of other nations who
deem themselves threatened by this kind of opinion
in Germany to increase their armaments; and these
increases will still further tend to strengthen Bernhardi's
school, and still further silence his critics.
The process by which force tends to crush reason is,
unhappily, cumulative and progressive. The vicious
circle can only be broken by the introduction somewhere
of the factor of reason.</p>
<p>And this is precisely, my critics urge, why we
need do nothing but concentrate on the instruments
of force!</p>
<p>The all but invariable attitude adopted by the
man in the street in this whole discussion is about
as follows:</p>
<p>"What, as practical men, we have to do, is to be
stronger than our enemy; the rest is theory, and does
not matter."</p>
<p>Well, the inevitable outcome of such an attitude is
catastrophe. It leads us not toward, but away from,
solution.</p>
<p>In the first edition of this book I wrote:</p>
<blockquote><p>Are we immediately to cease preparation for war, since
our defeat cannot advantage our enemy nor do us in the
long run much harm? No such conclusion results from a
study of the considerations elaborated here. It is evident
that so long as the misconception we are dealing with is
all but universal in Europe, so long as the nations believe
that in some way the military and political subjugation of
others will bring with it a tangible material advantage to
the conqueror, we all do, in fact, stand in danger from
such aggression. Not his interest, but what he deems to
be his interest, will furnish the real motive of our prospective
enemy's action. And as the illusion with which
we are dealing does, indeed, dominate all those minds
most active in European politics, we (in England) must,
while this remains the case, regard an aggression, even
such as that which Mr. Harrison foresees, as within the
bounds of practical politics. (What is not within the
bounds of possibility is the extent of devastation which
he foresees as the result of such attack, which, I think,
the foregoing pages sufficiently demonstrate.)</p>
<p>On this ground alone I deem that England, or any other
nation, is justified in taking means of self-defence to
prevent such aggression. This is not, therefore, a plea
for disarmament irrespective of the action of other
nations. So long as current political philosophy in
Europe remains what it is, I would not urge the reduction
of the British war budget by a single sovereign.</p></blockquote>
<p>I see no reason to alter a word of this. But if
preparation of the machinery of war is to be the
only form of energy in this matter—if national effort
is to neglect all other factors whatsoever—more and
more will sincere and patriotic men have doubts as
to whether they are justified in co-operating in further
piling up the armaments of any country. Of the
two risks involved—the risk of attack arising from
a possible superiority of armament on the part of a
rival, and the risk of drifting into conflict because,
concentrating all our energies on the mere instrument
of combat, we have taken no adequate trouble
to understand the facts of this case—it is at least an
arguable proposition that the second risk is the
greater. And I am prompted to this expression of
opinion without surrendering one iota of a lifelong
and passionate belief that a nation attacked should
defend itself to the last penny and to the last man.</p>
<p>In this matter it seems fatally easy to secure either
one of two kinds of action: that of the "practical
man" who limits his energies to securing a policy
which will perfect the machinery of war and disregard
anything else; or that of the Pacifist, who, persuaded
of the brutality or immorality of war, is apt to deprecate
effort directed at self-defence. What is needed
is the type of activity which will include both halves
of the problem: provision for education, for a Political
Reformation in this matter, <i>as well as</i> such means of
defence as will meantime counterbalance the existing
impulse to aggression. To concentrate on either half
to the exclusion of the other half is to render the whole
problem insoluble.</p>
<p>What must inevitably happen if the nations take
the line of the "practical man," and limit their
energies simply and purely to piling up armaments?</p>
<p>A British critic once put to me what he evidently
deemed a poser: "Do you urge that we shall be
stronger than our enemy, or weaker?"</p>
<p>To which I replied: "The last time that question
was asked me was in Berlin, by Germans.
What would you have had me reply to those Germans?"—a
reply which, of course, meant this: In
attempting to find the solution of this question in
terms of one party, you are attempting the impossible.
The outcome will be war, and war would
not settle it. It would all have to be begun over
again.</p>
<p>The British Navy League catechism says: "Defence
consists in being so strong that it will be dangerous
for your enemy to attack you."<a id="FNanchor_115_115"/><a href="#Footnote_115_115">[115]</a> Mr. Churchill,
even, goes farther than the Navy League, and says:
"The way to make war impossible is to make victory
certain."</p>
<p>The Navy League definition is at least possible
of application to practical politics, because rough
equality of the two parties would make attack by
either dangerous. Mr. Churchill's principle is impossible
of application to practical politics, because it
could only be applied by one party, and would, in the
terms of the Navy League principle, deprive the other
party of the right of defence. As a matter of simple
fact, both the British Navy League, by its demand for
two ships to one, and Mr. Churchill, by his demand
for certain victory, deny in this matter Germany's
right to defend herself; and such denial is bound, on
the part of a people animated by like motives to
themselves, to provoke a challenge. When the
British Navy League says, as it does, that a self-respecting
nation should not depend upon the goodwill
of foreigners for its safety, but upon its own
strength, it recommends Germany to maintain her
efforts to arrive at some sort of equality with England.
When Mr. Churchill goes farther, and says
that a nation is entitled to be so strong as to make
victory over its rivals certain, he knows that if
Germany were to adopt his own doctrine, its certain
outcome would be war.</p>
<p>In anticipation of such an objection, Mr. Churchill
says that preponderant power at sea is a luxury to
Germany, a necessity to Britain; that these efforts of
Germany are, as it were, a mere whim in no way
dictated by the real necessities of her people, and
having behind them no impulse wrapped up with
national needs.<a id="FNanchor_116_116"/><a href="#Footnote_116_116">[116]</a></p>
<p>If that be the truth, then it is the strongest argument
imaginable for the settlement of this Anglo-German
rivalry by agreement: by bringing about that
Political Reformation of Europe which it is the object
of these pages to urge.</p>
<p>Here are those of the school of Mr. Churchill who
say: The danger of aggression from Germany is so
great that England must have an enormous preponderance
of force—two to one; so great are the
risks Germany is prepared to take, that unless
victory on the English side is certain she will attack.
And yet, explain this same school, the impulse which
creates these immense burdens and involves these
immense risks is a mere whim, a luxury; the whole
thing is dissociated from any real national need.</p>
<p>If that really be the case, then, indeed, is it time
for a campaign of Education in Europe; time that
the sixty-five millions, more or less, of hard-working
and not very rich people, whose money support
alone makes this rivalry possible, learned what it is
all about. This "whim" has cost the two nations,
in the last ten years, a sum larger than the indemnity
France paid to Germany. Does Mr. Churchill
suppose that these millions know, or think, this
struggle one for a mere luxury, or whim? And if
they did know, would it be quite a simple matter for
the German Government to keep up the game?</p>
<p>But those who, during the last decade in England,
have in and out of season carried on this active campaign
for the increase of British armaments, do <i>not</i>
believe that Germany's action is the result of a mere
whim. They, being part of the public opinion of
Europe, subscribe to the general European doctrine
that Germany is pushed to do these things by real
national necessities, by her need for expansion, for
finding food and livelihood for all these increasing
millions. And if this is so, the English are asking
Germany, in surrendering this contest, to betray
future German generations—wilfully to withhold
from them those fields which the strength and fortitude
of this generation might win. If this common
doctrine is true, the English are asking Germany to
commit national suicide.<a id="FNanchor_117_117"/><a href="#Footnote_117_117">[117]</a></p>
<p>Why should it be assumed that Germany will do
it? That she will be less persistent in protecting
her national interest, her posterity, be less faithful
than the British themselves to great national impulses?
Has not the day gone by when educated
men can calmly assume that any Englishman is
worth three foreigners? And yet such an assumption,
ignorant and provincial as we are bound to
admit it to be, is the only one that can possibly
justify this policy of concentrating upon armament
alone.</p>
<p>Even Admiral Fisher can write:</p>
<blockquote><p>The supremacy of the British Navy is the best security
for the peace of the world.... If you rub it in, both at
home and abroad, that you are ready for instant war,
with every unit of your strength in the first line and
waiting to be first in, and hit your enemy in the belly and
kick him when he is down, and boil your prisoners in oil
(if you take any), and torture his women and children,
then people will keep clear of you.</p></blockquote>
<p>Would Admiral Fisher refrain from taking a given
line merely because, if he took it, someone would
"hit him in the belly," etc.? He would repudiate
the idea with the utmost scorn, and probably reply
that the threat would give him an added incentive to
take the line in question. But why should Admiral
Fisher suppose that he has a monopoly of courage,
and that a German Admiral would act otherwise than
he? Is it not about time that each nation abandoned
the somewhat childish assumption that it has a
monopoly of the courage and the persistence in the
world, and that things which would never frighten or
deter it will frighten and deter its rivals?</p>
<p>Yet in this matter the English assume either that
the Germans will be less persistent than they, or
that in this contest their backs will break first. A
coadjutor of Lord Roberts is calmly talking of a
Naval Budget of 400 or 500 million dollars, and
universal service as well, as a possibility of the all
but immediate future.<a id="FNanchor_118_118"/><a href="#Footnote_118_118">[118]</a> If England can stand that
now, why should not Germany, who is, we are told,
growing industrially more rapidly than the English,
be able to stand as much? But when she has arrived
at that point, the English, at the same rate, must
have a naval budget of anything from 750 to 1000
million dollars, a total armament budget of something
in the region of 1250 millions. The longer it goes on,
the worse will be England's relative position, because
she has imposed on herself a progressive handicap.</p>
<p>The end can only be conflict, and already the
policy of precipitating that conflict is raising its head.</p>
<p>Sir Edmund C. Cox writes in the premier English
review, the <i>Nineteenth Century</i>, for April, 1910:</p>
<blockquote><p>Is there no alternative to this endless yet futile
competition in shipbuilding? Yes, there is. It is one
which a Cromwell, a William Pitt, a Palmerston, a Disraeli,
would have adopted long ago. This is that alternative—the
only possible conclusion. It is to say to
Germany: "All that you have been doing constitutes a
series of unfriendly acts. Your fair words go for nothing.
Once for all, you must put an end to your warlike preparations.
If we are not satisfied that you do so, we shall
forthwith sink every battleship and cruiser which you
possess. The situation which you have created is intolerable.
If you determine to fight us, if you insist upon
war, war you shall have; but the time shall be of our
choosing and not of yours, and that time shall be now."
And that is where the present policy, the sheer bulldog
piling up of armaments without reference to or
effort towards a better political doctrine in Europe,
inevitably leads.</p></blockquote>
<h3>CHAPTER III</h3>
<p>IS THE POLITICAL REFORMATION POSSIBLE?</p>
<blockquote><p>Men are little disposed to listen to reason, "therefore we should
not talk reason"—Are men's ideas immutable?</p></blockquote>
<p>We have seen, therefore—</p>
<blockquote><p>1. That the need for defence arises from the
existence of a motive for attack.</p>
<p>2. That that motive is, consequently, part of the
problem of defence.</p>
<p>3. That, since as between the advanced peoples
we are dealing with in this matter, one party
is as able in the long run to pile up armaments
as the other, we cannot get nearer to solution
by armaments alone; we must get at the
original provoking cause—the motive making
for aggression.</p>
<p>4. That if that motive results from a true
judgment of the facts; if the determining
factor in a nation's well-being and progress is
really its power to obtain by force advantage
over others, the present situation of armament
rivalry tempered by war is a natural and
inevitable one.</p>
<p>5. That if, however, the view is a false one,
our progress towards solution will be marked
by the extent to which the error becomes
generally recognized in international public
opinion.</p></blockquote>
<p>That brings me to the last entrenchment of those
who actively or passively oppose propaganda looking
towards reform in this matter.</p>
<p>As already pointed out, the last year or two has
revealed a suggestive shifting of position on the part
of such opposition. The original position of the
defenders of the old political creeds was that the
economic thesis here outlined was just simply wrong;
then, that the principles themselves were sound
enough, but that they were irrelevant, because not
interests, but ideals, constituted the cause of conflict
between nations. In reply to which, of course, came
the query, What ideals, apart from questions of
interest, lie at the bottom of the conflict which is the
most typical of our time—what ideal motive is
Germany, for instance, pursuing in its presumed
aggression upon England? Consequently that position
has generally been abandoned. Then we were
told that men don't act by logic, but passion. Then
the critics were asked how they explained the general
character of <i>la haute politique</i>, its cold intrigues and
expediency, the extraordinary rapid changes in alliances
and <i>ententes</i>, all following exactly a line of
passionless interest reasoned, though from false
premises, with very great logic indeed; and were
asked whether all experience does not show that,
while passion may determine the energy with which
a given line of conduct is pursued, the direction of
that line of conduct is determined by processes of
another kind: John, seeing James, his life-long and
long-sought enemy, in the distance, has his hatred
passionately stirred, and harbors thoughts of murder.
As he comes near he sees that it is not James at all,
but a quiet and inoffensive neighbor, Peter. John's
thoughts of murder are appeased, not because he has
changed his nature, but because the recognition of a
simple fact has changed the direction of his passion.
What we in this matter hope to do is to show that the
nations are mistaking Peter for James.</p>
<p>Well, the last entrenchment of those who oppose
the work is the dogmatic assertion that though we
are right as to the material fact, its demonstration
can never be made; that this political reformation of
Europe the political rationalists talk about is a hopeless
matter; it implies a change of opinion so vast
that it can only be looked for as the result of whole
generations of educative processes.</p>
<p>Suppose this were true. What then? Will you
leave everything severely alone, and leave wrong and
dangerous ideas in undisturbed possession of the
political field?</p>
<p>This conclusion is not a policy; it is Oriental
fatalism—"Kismet," "the will of Allah."</p>
<p>Such an attitude is not possible among men dominated
by the traditions and the impulses of the
Western world. We do not let things slide in this
way; we do not assume that as men are not guided
by reason in politics, therefore we shall not reason
about politics. The time of statesmen is absorbed
in the discussion of these things. Our
press and literature are deeply concerned in them.
The talk and thought of men are about them.
However little they may deem reason to affect the
conduct of men, they go on reasoning. And progress
in conduct is determined by the degree of understanding
which results.</p>
<p>It is true that physical conflict marks the point at
which the reason has failed; men fight when they
have not been able to "come to an understanding"
in the common phrase, which is for once correct. But
is this a cause for deprecating the importance of clear
understanding? Is it not, on the contrary, precisely
why our energies should be devoted to improving
our capacity for dealing with these things by reason,
rather than by physical force?</p>
<p>Do we not inevitably arrive at the destination to
which every road in this discussion leads? However
we may start, with whatever plan, however elaborated
or varied, the end is always the same—the
progress of man in this matter depends upon the degree
to which his ideas are just; man advances by the
victories of his mind and character. Again we have
arrived at the region of platitude. But also again it
is one of those platitudes which most people deny.
Thus the London <i>Spectator</i>:</p>
<blockquote><p>For ourselves, as far as the main economic proposition
goes, he preaches to the converted.... If nations were
perfectly wise and held perfectly sound economic theories,
they would recognize that exchange is the union of forces,
and that it is very foolish to hate or be jealous of your
co-operators.... Men are savage, bloodthirsty creatures
... and when their blood is up will fight for a
word or a sign, or, as Mr. Angell would put it, for an
illusion.</p></blockquote>
<p>Criticism at the other end of the journalistic scale—that,
for instance, from Mr. Blatchford—is of an
exactly similar character. Mr. Blatchford says:</p>
<blockquote><p>Mr. Angell may be right in his contention that modern
war is unprofitable to both belligerents. I do not believe
it, but he may be right. But he is wrong if he imagines
that his theory will prevent European war. To prevent
European wars it needs more than the truth of his theory:
it needs that the war lords and diplomatists and financiers
and workers of Europe shall believe the theory.... So
long as the rulers of nations believe that war may be
expedient (see Clausewitz), and so long as they believe
they have the power, war will continue.... It will
continue until these men are fully convinced that it will
bring no advantage.</p></blockquote>
<p>Therefore, argues Mr. Blatchford, the demonstration
that war will not bring advantage is futile.</p>
<p>I am not here, for the purpose of controversy, putting
an imaginary conclusion into Mr. Blatchford's
mouth. It is the conclusion that he actually does
draw. The article from which I have quoted was
intended to demonstrate the futility of books like
this. It was by way of reply to an early edition
of this one. In common with the other critics, he
must have known that this is not a plea for the
impossibility of war (I have always urged with
emphasis that our ignorance on this matter makes
war not only possible, but extremely likely), but
for its futility. And the demonstration of its futility
is, I am now told, in itself futile!</p>
<p>I have expanded the arguments of this and others
of my critics thus:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>The war lords and diplomats are still wedded to the
old false theories; <i>therefore</i> we shall leave those
theories undisturbed, and generally deprecate
discussion of them.</p>
<p>Nations do not realize the facts; <i>therefore</i> we
should attach no importance to the work of
making them known.</p>
<p>These facts profoundly affect the well-being of
European peoples; <i>therefore</i> we shall not systematically
encourage the efficient study of
them.</p>
<p>If they were generally known, the practical outcome
would be that most of our difficulties
herein would disappear; <i>therefore</i> anyone who
attempts to make them known is an amiable
sentimentalist, a theorist, and so on, and so on.</p>
<p>"Things do not matter so much as people's
opinions about things"<a id="FNanchor_119_119"/><a href="#Footnote_119_119">[119]</a>; <i>therefore</i> no effort shall
be directed to a modification of opinion.</p></blockquote>
<blockquote>
<p>The only way for these truths to affect policy, to
become operative in the conduct of nations, is
to make them operative in the minds of men;
<i>therefore</i> discussion of them is futile.</p>
<p>Our troubles arise from the wrong ideas of nations;
<i>therefore</i> ideas do not count—they are "theories."</p>
<p>General conception and insight in this matter is
vague and ill-defined, so that action is always in
danger of being decided by sheer passion and irrationalism;
<i>therefore</i> we shall do nothing to
render insight clear and well-defined.</p>
<p>The empire of sheer impulse, of the non-rational, is
strongest when associated with ignorance (<i>e.g.</i>,
Mohammedan fanaticism, Chinese Boxerism),
and only yields to the general progress of ideas
(<i>e.g.</i>, sounder religious notions sweeping away
the hate and horrors of religious persecution);
<i>therefore</i> the best way to maintain peace is to
pay no attention to the progress of political
ideas.</p>
<p>The progress of ideas has completely transformed
religious feeling in so far as it settles the policy
of one religious group in relation to another;
<i>therefore</i> the progress of ideas will never transform
patriotic feeling, which settles the policy
of one political group in relation to another.</p></blockquote>
<p>What, in short, does the argument of my critics
amount to? This: that so slow, so stupid is the
world that, though the facts may be unassailable,
they will never be learned within any period that
need concern us.</p>
<p>Without in the least desiring to score off my critics,
and still less to be discourteous, I sometimes wonder
it has never struck them that in the eyes of the profane
this attitude of theirs must appear really as a
most colossal vanity. "We" who write in newspapers
and reviews understand these things; "we"
can be guided by reason and wisdom, but the common
clay will not see these truths for "thousands of
years." I talk to the converted (so I am told) when
my book is read by the editors and reviewers.
<i>They</i>, of course, can understand; but the notion that
mere diplomats and statesmen, the men who make
up Governments and nations, should ever do so is, of
course, quite too preposterous.</p>
<p>Personally, however flattering this notion might be,
I have never been able to feel its soundness. I have
always strongly felt the precise opposite—namely,
that what is plain to me will very soon be equally
plain to my neighbor. Possessing, presumably, as
much vanity as most, I am, nevertheless, absolutely
convinced that simple facts which stare an ordinary
busy man of affairs in the face are not going to be
for ever hid from the multitude. Depend upon it,
if "we" can see these things, so can the mere statesmen
and diplomats and those who do the work of the
world.</p>
<p>Moreover, if what "we" write in reviews and
books does not touch men's reasons, does not affect
their conduct, why do we write at all?</p>
<p>We do <i>not</i> believe it impossible to change or form
men's ideas; such a plea would doom us all to silence,
and would kill religious and political literature.
"Public Opinion" is not external to men; it is made
by men; by what they hear and read and have
suggested to them by their daily tasks, and talk and
contact.</p>
<p>If it <i>were</i> true, therefore, that the difficulties in the
way of modifying political opinion were as vast as my
critics would have us believe, that would not affect
our conduct; the more they emphasize those difficulties,
the more they emphasize the need for effort
on our part.</p>
<p>But it is not true that a change such as that involved
here necessarily "takes thousands of years."
I have already dealt with the plea, but would recall
only one incident that I have cited: a scene painted
by a Spanish artist of the Court and nobles and
populace in a great European city, gathered on a
public holiday as for a festival to see a beautiful
child burned to death for a faith that, as it plaintively
said, it had sucked in with its mother's milk.</p>
<p>How long separates us from that scene? Why,
not the lives of three ordinarily elderly people. And
how long after that scene—which was not an isolated
incident of uncommon kind, but a very everyday
matter, typical of the ideas and feelings of the time at
which it was enacted—was it before the renewal of
such became a practical impossibility? It was not a
hundred years. It was enacted in 1680, and within
the space of a short lifetime the world knew that
never again would a child be burned alive as the
result of a legal condemnation by a duly constituted
Court, and as a public festival, witnessed by the
King and the nobles and the populace, in one of the
great cities of Europe.</p>
<p>Or, do those who talk of "unchanging human
nature" and "thousands of years" really plead that
we are in danger of a repetition of such a scene? In
that case our religious toleration is a mistake. Protestants
stand in danger of such tortures, and should
arm themselves with the old armory of religious
combat—the rack, the thumbscrew, the iron maiden,
and the rest—as a matter of sheer protection.</p>
<p>"Men are savage, bloodthirsty creatures, and
will fight for a word or a sign," the <i>Spectator</i> tells
us, when their patriotism is involved. Well, until
yesterday, it was as true to say that of them when
their religion was involved. Patriotism is the religion
of politics. And as one of the greatest historians
of religious ideas has pointed out, religion and
patriotism are the chief moral influences moving
great bodies of men, and "the separate modifications
and mutual interaction of these two agents may
almost be said to constitute the moral history of
mankind."<a id="FNanchor_120_120"/><a href="#Footnote_120_120">[120]</a></p>
<p>But is it likely that a general progress which has
transformed religion is going to leave patriotism
unaffected; that the rationalization and humanization
which have taken place in the more complex
domain of religious doctrine and belief will not also
take place in the domain of politics? The problem of
religious toleration was beset with difficulties incalculably
greater than any which confront us in this
problem. Then, as now, the old order was defended
with real disinterestedness; then it was called religious
fervor; now it is called patriotism. The best of the
old inquisitors were as disinterested, as sincere, as
single-minded, as are doubtless the best of the Prussian
Junkers, the French Nationalists, the English
militarists. Then, as now, the progress towards
peace and security seemed to them a dangerous degeneration,
the break-up of faiths, the undermining
of most that holds society together. Then, as now,
the old order pinned its faith to the tangible and
visible instruments of protection—I mean the instruments
of physical force. And the Catholic, in protecting
himself by the Inquisition against what he
regarded as the dangerous intrigues of the Protestant,
was protecting what he regarded not merely as his
own social and political security, but the eternal
salvation, he believed, of unborn millions of men.
Yet he surrendered such instruments of defence, and
finally Catholic and Protestant alike came to see that
the peace and security of both were far better assured
by this intangible thing—the right thinking
of men—than by all the mechanical ingenuity of
prisons and tortures and burnings which it was possible
to devise. In like manner will the patriot come
finally to see that better than <i>Dreadnoughts</i> will be
the recognition on his part and on the part of his
prospective enemy, that there is no interest, material
or moral, in conquest and military domination.</p>
<p>And that hundred years which I have mentioned
as representing an apparently impassable gulf in the
progress of European ideas, a period which marked an
evolution so great that the very mind and nature of
men seemed to change, was a hundred years without
newspapers—a time in which books were such a
rarity that it took a generation for one to travel from
Madrid to London; in which the steam printing-press
did not exist, nor the railroad, nor the telegraph, nor
any of those thousand contrivances which now make
it possible for the words of an American statesman
spoken to-day to be read by the millions of Europe
to-morrow morning—to do, in short, more in the way
of the dissemination of ideas in ten months than
was possible then in a century.</p>
<p>When things moved so slowly, a generation or two
sufficed to transform the mind of Europe on the
religious side. Why should it be impossible to
change that mind on the political side in a generation,
or half a generation, when things move so much more
quickly? Are men less disposed to change their
political than their religious opinions? We all know
that <i>not</i> to be the case. In every country in Europe
we find political parties advocating, or at least
acquiescing in, policies which they strenuously opposed
ten years ago. Does the evidence available
go to show that the particular side of politics with
which we are dealing is notably more impervious to
change and development than the rest—less within
the reach and influence of new ideas?</p>
<p>I must risk here the reproach of egotism and bad
taste to call attention to a fact which bears more
directly on that point, perhaps, than any other that
could be cited.</p>
<p>It is some fifteen years since it first struck me that
certain economic facts of our civilization—facts of
such visible and mechanical nature as reacting
bourses and bank rate-movements, in all the economic
capitals of the world, and so on—would soon
force upon the attention of men a principle which,
though existing for long past in some degree in
human affairs, had not become operative to any
extent. Was there any doubt as to the reality of the
material facts involved? Circumstances of my
occupation happily furnished opportunities of discussing
the matter thoroughly with bankers and
statesmen of world-wide authority. There was no
doubt on that score. Had we yet arrived at the
point at which it was possible to make the matter
plain to general opinion? Were politicians too ill-educated
on the real facts of the world, too much
absorbed in the rough-and-tumble of workaday
politics to change old ideas? Were they, and the
rank and file, still too enslaved by the hypnotism of
an obsolete terminology to accept a new view? One
could only put it to a practical test. A brief exposition
of the cardinal principles was embodied
in a brief pamphlet and published obscurely without
advertisement, and bearing, necessarily, an unknown
name. The result was, under the circumstances,
startling, and certainly did not justify in the least
the plea that there exists universal hostility to the
advance of political rationalism. Encouragement
came from most unlooked-for quarters: public
men whose interests have been mainly military, alleged
Jingoes, and even from soldiers. The more
considerable edition has appeared in English, German,
French, Dutch, Danish, Swedish, Spanish,
Italian, Russian, Japanese, Erdu, Persian, and
Hindustani, and nowhere has the Press completely
ignored the book. Papers of Liberal tendencies have
welcomed it everywhere. Those of more reactionary
tendencies have been much less hostile than one
could have expected.<a id="FNanchor_121_121"/><a href="#Footnote_121_121">[121]</a></p>
<p>Does such an experience justify that universal rebelliousness
to political rationalism on which my
critics for the most part found their case? My
object in calling attention to it is evident. If this is
possible as the result of the effort of a single obscure
person working without means and without leisure,
what could not be accomplished by an organization
adequately equipped and financed? Mr. Augustine
Birrell says somewhere: "Some opinions, bold and
erect as they may still stand, are in reality but empty
shells. One shove would be fatal. Why is it not
given?"</p>
<p>If little apparently has been done in the modification
of ideas in this matter, it is because little
relatively has been attempted. Millions of us are
prepared to throw ourselves with energy into that
part of national defence which, after all, is a makeshift,
into agitation for the building of <i>Dreadnoughts</i>
and the raising of armies, the things in fact which can
be seen, where barely dozens will throw themselves
with equal ardor into that other department of
national defence, the only department which will
really guarantee security, but by means which are
invisible—the rationalization of ideas.</p>
<h3>CHAPTER IV</h3>
<p>METHODS</p>
<blockquote><p>Relative failure of Hague Conferences and the cause—Public
opinion the necessary motive force of national action—That
opinion only stable if informed—"Friendship" between nations
and its limitations—America's rôle in the coming "Political
Reformation."</p></blockquote>
<p>Much of the pessimism as to the possibility of any
progress in this matter is based on the failure of such
efforts as Hague Conferences. Never has the contest
of armament been so keen as when Europe
began to indulge in Peace Conferences. Speaking
roughly and generally, the era of great armament
expansion dates from the first Hague Conference.</p>
<p>Well, the reader who has appreciated the emphasis
laid in the preceding pages on working through the
reform of ideas will not feel much astonishment at the
failure of efforts such as these. The Hague Conferences
represented an attempt not to work through
the reform of ideas, but to modify by mechanical
means the political machinery of Europe, without
reference to the ideas which had brought it into
existence.</p>
<p>Arbitration treaties, Hague Conferences, International
Federation involve a new conception of
relationship between nations. But the ideals—political,
economical, and social—on which the old
conceptions are based, our terminology, our political
literature, our old habits of thought, diplomatic
inertia, which all combine to perpetuate the old
notions, have been left serenely undisturbed. And
surprise is expressed that such schemes do not
succeed.</p>
<p>French politics have given us this proverb, "I am
the leader, therefore I follow." This is not mere
cynicism, but expresses in reality a profound truth.
What is a leader or a ruler in a modern parliamentary
sense? He is a man who holds office by virtue of the
fact that he represents the mean of opinion in his
party. Initiative, therefore, cannot come from him
until he can be sure of the support of his party—that
is, until the initiative in question represents the
common opinion of his party. The author happened
to discuss the views embodied in this book with a
French parliamentary chief, who said in effect: "Of
course you are talking to the converted, but I am
helpless. Suppose that I attempted to embody these
views before they were ready for acceptance by my
party. I should simply lose my leadership in favor
of a man less open to new ideas, and the prospect of
their acceptance would not be increased, but diminished.
Even if I were not already converted, it
would be no good trying to convert me. Convert
the body of the party and its leaders will not need
conversion."</p>
<p>And this is the position of every civilized government,
parliamentary or not. The struggle for
religious freedom was not gained by agreements
drawn up between Catholic States and Protestant
States, or even between Catholic bodies and Protestant
bodies. No such process was possible, for in the
last resort there was no such thing as an absolutely
Catholic State or an absolutely Protestant one.
Our security from persecution is due simply to the
general recognition of the futility of the employment
of physical force in a matter of religious belief.
Our progress towards political rationalism will take
place in like manner.</p>
<p>There is no royal road of this kind to a better
state. It seems decreed that we shall not permanently
achieve improvement which we as individuals
have not paid for in the coin of hard thinking.</p>
<p>Nothing is easier to achieve in international politics
than academic declarations in favor of Peace.
But governments being trustees have a first duty in
the interests of their wards, or what they conceive
to be such interests, and they disregard what is still
looked upon as a conception having its origin in
altruistic and self-sacrificing motives. "Self-sacrifice"
is the last motive governments can allow themselves
to consider. They are created to protect, not
to sacrifice, the interests of which they are placed in
charge.</p>
<p>It is impossible for governments to base their
normal policies on conceptions which are in advance
of the general standard of the political opinion of
the people from whom they derive their power. The
average man will, it is true, quite readily subscribe
abstractly to a peace ideal, just as he will subscribe
abstractly to certain religious ideals—to take no
thought for the morrow, not to save up treasure upon
earth—without the faintest notion of making them a
guide of conduct, or, indeed, of seeing how they <i>can</i>
be a guide of conduct. At peace meetings he will
cheer lustily and sign petitions, because he believes
Peace to be a great moral idea, and that armies, like
the Police, are destined to disappear one day—on
about the same day in his belief—when the nature
of man shall have been altered.</p>
<p>One may be able fully to appreciate this attitude
of the "average sensual man" without doubting the
least in the world the sincerity, genuineness, wholeheartedness
of these emotional movements in favor of
peace, which from time to time sweep over a country
(as on the occasion of the Taft-Grey exchange
of views on arbitration). But what it is necessary
to emphasize, what cannot be too often reiterated,
is that these movements, however emotional and
sincere, are not movements which can lead to breaking
up the intellectual basis of the policy which
produces armaments in the Western World. These
movements embrace only one section of the factors
making for peace—the moral and the emotional.
And while those factors have immense power, they
are uncertain and erratic in their operation, and when
the shouting dies and there is a natural reaction from
emotion, and it is a question once more of doing the
humdrum week-day work of the world, of pushing
our interests, of finding markets, of achieving the
best possible generally for our nation as against other
nations, of preparing for the future, of organizing
one's efforts, the old code of compromise between the
ideal and the necessary will be as operative as ever.
So long as his notions of what war can accomplish
in an economic or commercial sense remain what they
are, the average man will not deem that his prospective
enemy is likely to make the peace ideal a
guide of conduct. Incidentally he would be right.
At the bottom of his mind—and I say this not lightly
and as a guess, but as an absolute conviction after
very close observation—the ideal of peace is conceived
as a demand that he weaken his own defences
on no better assurance than that his prospective rival
or enemy will be well-behaved and not wicked enough
to attack him.</p>
<p>It appeals to him as about equivalent to asking
that he shall not lock his doors because to suppose
people will rob him is to have a low view of human
nature!</p>
<p>Though he believes his own position in the world
(as a colonial Power, etc.) to be the result of the use of
force by himself, of his readiness to seize what could
be seized, he is asked to believe that foreigners will
not do in the future what he himself has done in the
past. He finds this difficult to swallow.</p>
<p>Save in his Sunday moods, the whole thing makes
him angry. It appeals to him as "unfair," in that he
is asked by his own countrymen to do something
that they apparently do not ask of foreigners; it
appears to him as unmanly, in that he is asked to
surrender the advantage which his strength has
secured him in favor of a somewhat emasculate ideal.</p>
<p>The patriot feels that his moral intention is every
bit as sincere as that of the pacifist—that, indeed,
patriotism is a finer moral ideal than pacifism. The
difference between the pacifist and the advocate of
<i>real-politik</i> is an intellectual and not a moral one at
all, and the assumption of superior morality which the
former sometimes makes does the cause which he has
at heart infinite harm. Until the pacifist can show
that the employment of military force fails to secure
material advantage, the common man will, in ordinary
times, continue to believe that the militarist has a
moral sanction as great as that underlying pacifism.</p>
<p>It may seem gratuitously ungracious to suggest
that the very elevation which has marked peace
propaganda in the past should have been the very
thing that has sometimes stood in the way of its
success. But such a phenomenon is not new in
human development. There was as much good
intention in the world of religious warfare and oppression
as there is in ours. Indeed, the very earnestness
of the men who burnt, tortured, and imprisoned and
stamped out human thought with the very best
motives, was precisely the factor which stood in the
way of improvement.</p>
<p>Improvement came finally, not from better intention,
but from an acuter use of the intelligence of men,
from hard mental work.</p>
<p>So long as we assume that high motive, a better
moral tone is all that is needed in international
relations, and that an understanding of these problems
will in some wonderful way come of itself, without
hard and systematic intellectual effort, we shall
make little headway.</p>
<p>Good feeling and kindliness and a ready emotion
are among the most precious things in life, but they
are qualities possessed by some of the most retrograde
nations in the world, because in them they
are not coupled with the homely quality of hard work,
in which one may include hard thinking. This last
is the real price of progress, and we shall make none
of worth unless we pay it.</p>
<p>A word or two as to the rôle of "friendship" in
international relations. Courtesy and a certain
measure of good faith are essential elements wherever
civilized men come in direct contact; without them
organized society would go to pieces. But these
invaluable elements never yet of themselves settled
real differences; they merely render the other factors
of adjustment possible. Why should one expect
courtesy and good-fellowship to settle grave political
differences between English and Germans when they
altogether fail to settle such differences between
English and English? What should we say of a
statesman professing to be serious who suggested
that all would be well between President Wilson and
the lobbyists concerning the tariff, between the
Democrats and Republicans on protection, between
the millionaire and the day laborer on the question of
the income tax, and a thousand and one other things—that
all these knotty problems would disappear,
if only the respective protagonists could be persuaded
to take lunch together? Is it not a little
childish?</p>
<p>Yet I am bound to admit that a whole school of
persons who deal with international problems would
have us believe that all international differences
would disappear if only we could have enough junketings,
dinner-parties, exchange visits of clergymen,
and what not. These things have immense use in so
far as they facilitate discussion and the elucidation
of the policy in which the rivalry has its birth, and to
that extent only. But if they are not vehicles of
intellectual comprehension, if the parties go away
with as little understanding of the factors and nature
of international relationship as they had before such
meetings took place, they have served no purpose
whatsoever.</p>
<p>The work of the world does not get done merely by
being good friends with everybody; the problems
of international diplomacy are not to be solved
merely by a sort of international picnic; that would
make the world too easy a place to live in.</p>
<p>However ungracious it may seem, it is nevertheless
dangerous to allow to go unchallenged the notion
that the cultivation of "friendship and affection"
between nations, irrespective of the other factors
affecting their relationship, can ever seriously modify
international politics. The matter is of grave
importance, because so much good effort is spent in
putting the cart before the horse, and attempting to
create an operative factor out of a sentiment that
can never be constant and positive one way or the
other, since it must in the nature of things be largely
artificial. It is a psychological impossibility in any
ordinary workaday circumstances to have any special
feeling of affection for a hundred or sixty or forty millions
of people, composed of infinitely diverse elements,
good, bad, and indifferent, noble and mean, pleasing
and unpleasing, whom, moreover, we have never seen
and never shall see. It is too large an order. We
might as well be asked to entertain feelings of affection
for the Tropic of Capricorn. As I have already
hinted, we have no particular affection for the great
mass of our own countrymen—your lobbyist enthusiast
for Mr. Wilson, your railroad striker for the
employer of labor, your Suffragette for your anti-Suffragette,
and so on <i>ad infinitum</i>. Patriotism
has nothing to do with it. The patriot is often the
person who had the heartiest detestation for a large
mass of his fellow-countrymen. Consider any anti-administration
literature. As an English instance a
glance at Mr. Leo Maxse's monthly masterpieces of
epithet-making, or at what the pan-Germans have to
say of their own Empire and Government ("poltroons
in the pay of the English" is a choice tit-bit
I select from one German newspaper), will soon
convince one.</p>
<p>Why, therefore, should we be asked to entertain for
foreigners a sentiment we do not give to our own
people? And not only to entertain that sentiment,
but to make (always in the terms of the present
political beliefs) great sacrifices on behalf of it!</p>
<p>Need it be said that I have not the least desire to
deprecate sincere emotion as a factor in progress?
Emotion and enthusiasm form the divine stimulus
without which no great things would be achieved;
but emotion divorced from mental and moral discipline
is not the kind on which wise men will place a
very high value. Some of the intensest emotion of
the world has been given to some of the worst possible
objects. Just as in the physical world, the same
forces—steam, gunpowder, what you will—which,
controlled and directed may do an infinitely useful
work—may, uncontrolled, cause accidents and catastrophes
of the gravest kind.</p>
<p>Nor is it true that the better understanding of this
matter is beyond the great mass of men, that sounder
ideas depend upon the comprehension of complex
and abstruse points, correct judgment in intricate
matters of finance or economics. Things which seem
in one stage of thought obscure and difficult are
cleared up merely by setting one or two crooked facts
straight. The rationalists, who a generation or two
ago struggled with such things as the prevalent belief
in witchcraft, may have deemed that the abolition of
superstitions of this kind would take "thousands of
years."</p>
<p>Lecky has pointed out that during the eighteenth
century many judges in Europe—not ignorant men,
but, on the contrary, exceedingly well-educated men,
trained to sift evidence—were condemning people to
death by hundreds for witchcraft. Acute and educated
men still believed in it; its disproof demanded
a large acquaintance with the forces and processes
of physical nature, and it was generally thought that,
while a few exceptional intelligences here and there
would shake off these beliefs, they would remain
indefinitely the possessions of the great mass of
mankind.</p>
<p>What has happened? A schoolboy to-day would
scout the evidence which, on the judgment of very
learned men, sent thousands of poor wretches to their
doom in the eighteenth century. Would the schoolboy
necessarily be more learned or more acute than
those judges? They probably knew a great deal
about the science of witchcraft, were more familiar
with its literature, with the arguments which supported
it, and they would have hopelessly worsted
any nineteenth-century schoolboy in any argument
on the subject. The point is, however, that the
schoolboy would have two or three essential facts
straight, instead of getting them crooked.</p>
<p>All the fine theories about the advantages of conquest,
of territorial aggrandizement, so learnedly
advanced by the Mahans and the von Stengels; the
immense value which the present-day politician
attaches to foreign conquest, all these absurd rivalries
aiming at "stealing" one another's territory, will
be recognized as the preposterous illusions that they
are by the younger mind, which really sees the
quite plain fact that the citizen of a small State is
just as well off as the citizen of a great. From that
fact, which is not complex or difficult in the least, will
emerge the truth that modern government is a matter
of administration, and that it can no more profit a
community to annex other communities, than it could
profit London to annex Manchester. These things
will not need argument to be clear to the schoolboy of
the future—they will be self-evident, like the improbability
of an old woman causing a storm at sea.</p>
<p>Of course, it is true that many of the factors bearing
on this improvement will be indirect. As our education
becomes more rational in other fields, it will
make for understanding in this; as the visible factors
of our civilization make plain—as they are making
plainer every day—the unity and interdependence of
the modern world, the attempt to separate those
interdependent activities by irrelevant divisions must
more and more break down. All improvement in
human co-operation—and human co-operation is a
synonym for civilization—must help the work of
those laboring in the field of international relationship.
But again I would reiterate that the work of
the world does not get itself done. It is done by
men; ideas do not improve themselves, they are improved
by the thought of men; and it is the efficiency
of the conscious effort which will mainly determine
progress.</p>
<p>When all nations realize that if England can no
longer exert force towards her Colonies, others
certainly could not; that if a great modern Empire
cannot usefully employ force as against communities
that it "owns," still less can we employ it usefully
against communities that we do not "own"; when
the world as a whole has learned the real lesson of
British Imperial development, not only will that
Empire have achieved greater security than it can
achieve by battleships, but it will have played a
part in human affairs incomparably greater and more
useful than could be played by any military "leadership
of the human race," that futile duplication of
the Napoleonic rôle, which Imperialists of a certain
school seem to dream for us.</p>
<p>It is to Anglo-Saxon practice, and to Anglo-Saxon
experience, that the world will look as a guide in this
matter. The extension of the dominating principle
of the British Empire to European society as a whole
is the solution of the international problem which this
book urges. That extension cannot be made by military
means. The English conquest of great military
nations is a physical impossibility, and it would
involve the collapse of the principle upon which the
Empire is based if it were. The day for progress by
force has passed; it will be progress by ideas or not at
all.</p>
<p>Because these principles of free human co-operation
between communities are, in a special sense, an
Anglo-Saxon development, it is upon us that there
falls the responsibility of giving a lead. If it does
not come from us, who have developed these principles
as between all the communities which have
sprung from the Anglo-Saxon race, can we ask to
have it given elsewhere? If we have not faith in our
own principles, to whom shall we look?</p>
<p>English thought gave us the science of political
economy; Anglo-Saxon thought and practice must
give us another science, that of International Polity—the
science of the political relationship of human
groups. We have the beginnings of it, but it sadly
needs systemization—recognition by those intellectually
equipped to develop it and enlarge it.</p>
<p>The developments of such a work would be in keeping
with the contributions which the practical genius
and the positive spirit of the Anglo-Saxon race
have already made to human progress.</p>
<p>I believe that, if the matter were put efficiently
before them with the force of that sane, practical,
disinterested labor and organization which have been
so serviceable in the past in other forms of propaganda—not
only would they prove particularly
responsive to the labor, but Anglo-Saxon tradition
would once more be associated with the leadership in
one of those great moral and intellectual movements
which would be so fitting a sequel to our leadership
in such things as human freedom and parliamentary
government. Failing such effort and such response,
what are we to look for? Are we, in blind obedience
to primitive instinct and old prejudices, enslaved by
the old catchwords and that curious indolence which
makes the revision of old ideas unpleasant, to duplicate
indefinitely on the political and economic side
a condition from which we have liberated ourselves
on the religious side? Are we to continue to
struggle, as so many good men struggled in the first
dozen centuries of Christendom—spilling oceans of
blood, wasting mountains of treasure—to achieve
what is at bottom a logical absurdity; to accomplish
something which, when accomplished, can
avail us nothing, and which, if it could avail us
anything, would condemn the nations of the world
to never-ending bloodshed and the constant defeat
of all those aims which men, in their sober hours,
know to be alone worthy of sustained endeavor?</p>
<h2>APPENDIX</h2>
<p>ON RECENT EVENTS IN EUROPE</p>
<p>At the outbreak of the Balkan War "The Great Illusion"
was subjected to much criticism, on the ground that the
war tended to disprove its theses. The following quotations,
one from Mr. Churchill, the First Lord of the
Admiralty, and the other from the English <i>Review of
Reviews</i>, are typical of many others.</p>
<p>Mr. Churchill said, in a speech at Sheffield:</p>
<blockquote><p>Whether we blame the belligerents or criticise the powers, or sit
in sackcloth and ashes ourselves is absolutely of no consequence at
the present moment....</p>
<p>We have sometimes been assured by persons who profess to
know that the danger of war has become an illusion.... Well,
here is a war which has broken out in spite of all that rulers
and diplomatists could do to prevent it, a war in which the Press
has had no part, a war which the whole force of the money power has
been subtly and steadfastly directed to prevent, which has come upon
us, not through the ignorance or credulity of the people, but, on the
contrary, through their knowledge of their history and their destiny,
and through their intense realization of their wrongs and of their
duties, as they conceived them, a war which from all these causes
has burst upon us with all the force of a spontaneous explosion,
and which in strife and destruction has carried all before it. Face
to face with this manifestation, who is the man bold enough to say
that force is never a remedy? Who is the man who is foolish enough
to say that martial virtues do not play a vital part in the health and
honor of every people? (Cheers.) Who is the man who is vain
enough to suppose that the long antagonisms of history and of time
can in all circumstances be adjusted by the smooth and superficial
conventions of politicians and ambassadors?</p></blockquote>
<p>The London <i>Review of Reviews</i> said in an article on
"The Débâcle of Norman Angell":</p>
<blockquote><p>Mr. Norman Angell's theory was one to enable the citizens of this
country to sleep quietly, and to lull into false security the citizens
of all great countries. That is undoubtedly the reason why he met
with so much success.... It was a very comfortable theory for
those nations which have grown rich and whose ideals and initiative
have been sapped by overmuch prosperity. But the great delusion
of Norman Angell, which led to the writing of "The Great Illusion,"
has been dispelled for ever by the Balkan League. In this connection
it is of value to quote the words of Mr. Winston Churchill, which
give very adequately the reality as opposed to theory.</p></blockquote>
<p>In reply to these and similar criticisms I wrote several
articles in the London Press, from which the following
few pages are selected.</p>
<p>What has Pacifism, Old or New, to say now?</p>
<p>Is War impossible?</p>
<p>Is it unlikely?</p>
<p>Is it futile?</p>
<p>Is not force a remedy, and at times the only remedy?</p>
<p>Could any remedy have been devised on the whole as
conclusive and complete as that used by the Balkan
peoples?</p>
<p>Have not the Balkan peoples redeemed War from the
charges too readily brought against it as simply an instrument
of barbarism?</p>
<p>Have questions of profit and loss, economic considerations,
anything whatever to do with this war?</p>
<p>Would the demonstration of its economic futility
have kept the peace?</p>
<p>Are theories and logic of the slightest use, since force
alone can determine the issue?</p>
<p>Is not war therefore inevitable and must we not
prepare diligently for it?</p>
<p>I will answer all these quite simply and directly without
casuistry or logic-chopping and honestly desiring to
avoid paradox and "cleverness." Nor will these quite
simple answers be in contradiction to anything that I
have written, nor will they invalidate any of the principles
I have attempted to explain.</p>
<p>My answers may be summarized thus:</p>
<blockquote><p>(1) This war has justified both the Old Pacifism
and the New. By universal admission events
have proved that the Pacifists who opposed the
Crimean War were right and their opponents
wrong. Had public opinion given more consideration
to those Pacifist principles, this
country would not have "backed the wrong
horse" and this war, two wars which have
preceded it and many of the abominations of
which the Balkan peninsula has been the scene
during the last 60 years might have been
avoided. In any case Great Britain would not
now carry upon her shoulders the responsibility
of having during half a century supported the
Turk against the Christian and of having tried
uselessly to prevent what has now taken place—the
break-up of the Turk's rule in Europe.</p>
<p>(2) War is not impossible, and no responsible
Pacifist ever said it was; it is not the likelihood
of war which is the illusion, but its benefits.</p>
<p>(3) It is likely or unlikely according as the parties
to a dispute are guided by wisdom or folly.</p>
<p>(4) It <i>is</i> futile and force is no remedy.</p>
<p>(5) Its futility is proven by the war waged daily
by the Turks as conquerors, during the last
400 years. And if the Balkan peoples choose
the less evil of two kinds of war and will use
their victory to bring a system based on force
and conquest to an end, we who do not believe
in force and conquest will rejoice in their action
and believe it will achieve immense benefits.
But if instead of using their victory to eliminate
force, they in their turn pin their faith
to it, continue to use it the one against the
other and to exploit by its means the populations
they rule; if they become not the organizers
of social co-operation among the Balkan
populations, but merely, like the Turks, their
conquerors and "owners," then they in their
turn will share the fate of the Turks.</p>
<p>(6) The fundamental causes of this war are economic
in the narrower, as well as in the larger
sense of the term; in the first because conquest
was the Turk's only trade—he desired to live
out of taxes wrung from a conquered people,
to exploit them as a means of livelihood, and
this conception was at the root of most of
Turkish misgovernment. And in the larger
sense its cause is economic because in the
Balkans, remote geographically from the main
drift of European economic development, there
has not grown up that interdependent social
life, the innumerable contacts which in the rest
of Europe have done so much to attenuate
primitive religious and racial hatreds.</p>
<p>(7) A better understanding by the Turk of the real
nature of civilized government, of the economic
futility of conquest, of the fact that a means of
livelihood (an economic system) based upon
having more force than someone else and using
it ruthlessly against him is an impossible form
of human relationship bound to break down,
<i>would</i> have kept the peace.</p>
<p>(8) If European statecraft had not been animated
by false conceptions, largely economic in origin,
based upon a belief in the necessary rivalry of
states, the advantages of preponderant force
and conquest, the Western nations could have
composed their quarrels and ended the abominations
of the Balkan peninsula long ago—even
in the opinion of the <i>Times</i>. And it is our
own false statecraft—that of Great Britain—which
has a large part of the responsibility for
this failure of European civilization. It has
caused us to sustain the Turk in Europe, to
fight a great and popular war with that aim,
and led us into treaties which, had they been
kept, would have obliged us to fight to-day on
the side of the Turk against the Balkan States.</p>
<p>(9) If by "theories" and "logic" is meant the discussion
of and interest in principles, the ideas
that govern human relationship, they are the
only things that can prevent future wars, just
as they were the only things that brought religious
wars to an end—a preponderant power
"imposing" peace playing no rôle therein. Just
as it was false religious theories which made the
religious wars, so it is false political theories
which make the political wars.</p>
<p>(10) War is only inevitable in the sense that other
forms of error and passion—religious persecution
for instance—are inevitable; they cease
with better understanding, as the attempt to
impose religious belief by force has ceased in
Europe.</p>
<p>(11) We should not prepare for war; we should
prepare to prevent war; and though that preparation
may include battleships and conscription,
those elements will quite obviously make
the tension and danger greater unless there is
also a better European opinion.</p></blockquote>
<p>These summarized replies need a little expansion.</p>
<p>Had we thrashed out the question of war and peace
as we must finally, it would hardly be necessary to explain
that the apparent paradox in Answer No. 4 (that
war is futile, and that this war will have immense benefits)
is due to the inadequacy of our language, which
compels us to use the same word for two opposed purposes,
not to any real contradiction of fact.</p>
<p>We called the condition of the Balkan peninsula
"Peace" until the attack was made on Turkey merely
because the respective Ambassadors still happened to be
resident in the capitals to which they were accredited.</p>
<p>Let us see what "Peace" under Turkish rule really
meant and who is the real invader in this war. Here is
a very friendly and impartial witness—Sir Charles Elliot—who
paints for us the character of the Turk as an
"administrator":</p>
<blockquote><p>The Turk in Europe has an overweening sense of his superiority,
and remains a nation apart, mixing little with the conquered populations,
whose customs and ideas he tolerates, but makes little effort
to understand. The expression, indeed, "Turkey in Europe" means
indeed no more than "England in Asia," if used as a designation for
India.... The Turks have done little to assimilate the people
whom they have conquered, and still less, been assimilated by them.
In the larger part of the Turkish dominions, the Turks themselves
are in a minority.... The Turks certainly resent the dismemberment
of their Empire, but not in the sense in which the French resent
the conquest of Alsace-Lorraine by Germany. They would never
use the word "Turkey" or even its oriental equivalent, "The High
Country" in ordinary conversation. They would never say that
Syria and Greece are parts of Turkey which have been detached, but
merely that they are tributaries which have become independent,
provinces once occupied by Turks where there are no Turks now.
As soon as a province passes under another Government, the Turks
find it the most natural thing in the world to leave it and go somewhere
else. In the same spirit the Turk talks quite pleasantly of
leaving Constantinople some day, he will go over to Asia and found
another capital. One can hardly imagine Englishmen speaking
like that of London, but they might conceivably speak so of Calcutta....
The Turk is a conqueror and nothing else. The history of
the Turk is a catalogue of battles. His contributions to art, literature,
science, and religion, are practically nil. Their desire has not
been to instruct, to improve, hardly even to govern, but simply to
conquer.... The Turk makes nothing at all; he takes whatever
he can get, as plunder or pillage. He lives in the houses which he
finds, or which he orders to be built for him. In unfavorable
circumstances he is a marauder. In favorable, a <i>Grand Seigneur</i>
who thinks it his right to enjoy with grace and dignity all that the
world can hold, but who will not lower himself by engaging in art,
literature, trade, or manufacture. Why should he, when there are
other people to do these things for him. Indeed, it may be said that
he takes from others even his religion, clothes, language, customs;
there is hardly anything which is Turkish and not borrowed. The
religion is Arabic; the language half Arabic and Persian; the literature
almost entirely imitative; the art Persian or Byzantine; the
costumes, in the Upper Classes and Army mostly European. There
is nothing characteristic in manufacture or commerce, except an
aversion to such pursuits. In fact, all occupations, except agriculture
and military service are distasteful to the true Osmanli. He is
not much of a merchant. He may keep a stall in a bazaar, but his
operations are rarely undertaken on a scale which merits the name
of commerce or finance. It is strange to observe how, when trade
becomes active in any seaport, or upon the railway lines, the Osmanli
retires and disappears, while Greeks, Armenians, and Levantines
thrive in his place. Neither does he much affect law, medicine or
the learned professions. Such callings are followed by Moslems
but they are apt to be of non-Turkish race. But though he does
none of these things ... the Turk is a soldier. The moment a
sword or rifle is put into his hands, he instinctively knows how to
use it with effect, and feels at home in the ranks or on a horse. The
Turkish Army is not so much a profession or an institution necessitated
by the fears and aims of the Government as the quite normal
state of the Turkish nation.... Every Turk is a born soldier, and
adopts other pursuits chiefly because times are bad. When there is a
question of fighting, if only in a riot, the stolid peasant wakes up and
shows surprising power of finding organization and expedients,
and alas! a surprising ferocity. The ordinary Turk is an honest
and good-humored soul, kind to children and animals, and very
patient; but when the fighting spirit comes on him, he becomes like
the terrible warriors of the Huns or Genghis Khan, and slays, burns,
and ravages without mercy or discrimination.<a id="FNanchor_122_122"/><a href="#Footnote_122_122">[122]</a></p></blockquote>
<p>Such is the verdict of an instructed, travelled, and
observant English author and diplomatist, who lived
among these people for many years and who learned to
like them, who studied them and their history. It does
not differ, of course, appreciably, from what practically
every student of the Turk has discovered: the Turk is
the typical conqueror. His nation has lived by the
sword and to-day he is dying by the sword, because
the sword, the mere exercise of force by one man or
group of men upon another, conquest in other words,
is an impossible form of human relationship.</p>
<p>In order to maintain this evil form of relationship—its
evil and futility constitute the whole basis of the
principles I have attempted to illustrate—he has not
even observed the rough chivalry of the brigand. The
brigand, though he might knock men on the head, will
refrain from having his force take the form of butchering
women and disembowelling children. Not so the Turk.
His attempt at Government will take the form of the
obscene torture of children, of a bestial ferocity which
is not a matter of dispute or exaggeration, but a thing
to which scores, hundreds, thousands even of credible
European witnesses have testified. "The finest gentleman,
sir, that ever butchered a woman or burned a
village," is the phrase that <i>Punch</i> most justly puts into
the mouth of the defender of our traditional Turcophil
policy.</p>
<p>This condition is "Peace" and the act which would
put a stop to it is "War"! It is the inexactitude and
inadequacy of our language which create much of the
confusion of thought in this matter; we have the same
term for action destined to achieve a given end and for
counter-action destined to prevent it.</p>
<p>Yet we manage in other than the international field,
in civil matters, to make the thing clear enough.</p>
<p>Once an American town was set on fire by incendiaries
and was threatened with destruction. In order
to save at least a part of it the authorities deliberately
burned down a block of buildings in the pathway of
the fire. Would those incendiaries be entitled to say
that the town authorities were incendiaries also and
"believed in setting fire to towns"? Yet this is precisely
the point of view of those who tax Pacifists with
approving war because they approve the measure aimed
at bringing it to an end.</p>
<p>Put it another way. You do not believe that force
should determine the transfer of property or conformity
to a creed, and I say to you: "Hand me your purse and
conform to my creed or I kill you." You say: "Because
I do not believe that force should settle these
matters, I shall try to prevent it settling them; therefore
if you attack I shall resist; if I did not I should be
allowing force to settle them." I attack; you resist
and disarm me and say: "My force having neutralized
yours and, the equilibrium being now established, I will
hear any reasons you may have to urge for my paying
you money or any argument in favor of your creed.
Reason, understanding, adjustment shall settle it."
You would be a Pacifist. Or, if you deem that that word
connotes non-resistance, though to the immense bulk of
Pacifists it does not, you would be an Anti-bellicist, to
use a dreadful word coined by M. Emile Faguet in the
discussion of this matter. If however you said: "Having
disarmed you and established the equilibrium, I
shall now upset it in my favor by taking your weapon
and using it against you unless you hand me <i>your</i> purse
and subscribe to <i>my</i> creed. I do this because force
alone can determine issues and because it is a law of life
that the strong should eat up the weak," you would then
be a Bellicist.</p>
<p>In the same way, when we prevent the brigand from
carrying on his trade—taking wealth by force—it is not
because we believe in force as a means of livelihood, but
precisely because we do not. And if, in preventing the
brigand from knocking out brains, we are compelled to
knock out his brains, is it because we believe in knocking
out people's brains? Or would we urge that to do so
is the way to carry on a trade or to govern a nation or
that it could be the basis of human relationship?</p>
<p>In every civilized country, the basis of the relationship
on which the community rests is this: no individual
is allowed to settle his differences with another by force.
But does this mean that if one threatens to take my
purse, I am not allowed to use force to prevent it?
That if he threatens to kill me, I am not to defend myself,
because "the individual citizens are not allowed to
settle their differences by force"? It is <i>because</i> of that,
because the act of self-defence is an attempt to prevent
the settlement of a difference by force, that the law
justifies it.<a id="FNanchor_123_123"/><a href="#Footnote_123_123">[123]</a></p>
<p>But the law would not justify me if, having disarmed
my opponent, having neutralized his force by my own
and re-established the social equilibrium, I immediately
proceeded to upset it by asking him for his purse on pain
of murder. I should then be settling the matter by
force—I should then have ceased to be a Pacifist and
have become a Bellicist.</p>
<p>For that is the difference between the two conceptions;
the Bellicist says: "Force alone can settle these matters;
it is the final appeal, therefore fight it out; let the best
man win. When you have preponderant strength,
impose your view; force the other man to your will; not
because it is right, but because you are able to do so."
It is the "excellent policy" which Lord Roberts attributes
to Germany and approves.</p>
<p>We Anti-bellicists take an exactly contrary view. We
say: "To fight it out settles nothing, since it is not a
question of who is stronger, but of whose view is best
and, as that is not always easy to establish, it is of the
utmost importance in the interest of all parties, in the
long run, to keep force out of it."</p>
<p>The former is the policy of the Turks. They have
been obsessed with the idea that, if only they had enough
of physical force ruthlessly exercised, they could solve
the whole question of government, of existence for that
matter, without troubling about social adjustment,
understanding, equity, law, commerce; that "blood
and iron" were all that was needed. The success of
that policy can now be judged.</p>
<p>Good or evil will come of the present war according
as the Balkan States are on the whole guided by the
Bellicist or by the opposed principle. If, having now
momentarily eliminated force as between themselves,
they re-introduce it; if the strongest, presumably Bulgaria,<a id="FNanchor_124_124"/><a href="#Footnote_124_124">[124]</a>
adopts Lord Roberts's "excellent policy" of
striking because she has the preponderant force, enters
upon a career of conquest of other members of the Balkan
League and of the populations of the conquered territories
and uses them for exploitation by military force—why
then there will be no settlement and this war will
have accomplished nothing save futile waste and
slaughter. For they will have taken under a new flag,
the pathway of the Turk to savagery, degeneration,
death.</p>
<p>If on the other hand they are guided more by the
Pacifist principle, if they believe that co-operation
among States is better than conflict, if they believe that
the common interest of all in good Government is greater
than the special interest of anyone in conquest, that the
understanding of human relationships, the capacity
for the organization of society are the means by which
men progress and not the imposition of force by one
man or group upon another, why, they will have taken
the pathway to better civilization. But then they will
have disregarded Lord Roberts's advice.</p>
<p>This distinction between the two systems, far from
being a matter of abstract theory of metaphysics or logic-chopping,
is just the difference which distinguishes the
Anglo-Saxon from the Turk, which distinguishes America
from Turkey. The Turk has as much physical vigor
as the American, is as virile, manly, and military. The
Turk has the same raw materials of Nature, soil, and
water. There is no difference in the capacity for the
exercise of physical force—or if there is, the difference
is in favor of the Turk. The real difference is a difference
of ideas, of mind, outlook on the part of the
individuals composing the respective societies; the Turk
has one general conception of human society and the
code and principles upon which it is founded, mainly
a Militarist one; the American has another, mainly a
Pacifist one. And whether the European society as a
whole is to drift towards the Turkish ideal or towards
the Anglo-Saxon ideal will depend upon whether it is
animated mainly by the Pacifist or mainly by the Bellicist
doctrine; if the former, it will stagger blindly like
the Turk along the path to barbarism; if the latter, it
will take a better road.</p>
<p>In dealing with answer No. 4 I have shown how the
ambiguity of terms<a id="FNanchor_125_125"/><a href="#Footnote_125_125">[125]</a> used leads us so much astray in our
notions of the real rôle of force in human relationships.
But there is a curious phenomenon of thought which
explains perhaps still more how misconceptions grow
up on this subject and that is the habit of thinking of a
war which, of course, must include two parties in terms
solely of one party at a time. Thus one critic<a id="FNanchor_126_126"/><a href="#Footnote_126_126">[126]</a> is quite
sure that because the Balkan peoples "recked nothing
of financial disaster," economic considerations have had
nothing to do with their war—a conclusion which seems
to be arrived at by the process of judgment just indicated:
to find the cause of conditions produced by two parties
you shall rigorously ignore one. For there is a great deal
of internal evidence for believing that the writer of the
article in question would admit very readily that the
efforts of the Turk to wring taxes out of the conquered
peoples—not in return for a civilized administration,
but simply as the means of livelihood, of turning conquest
into a trade—had a very great deal to do in explaining
the Turk's presence there at all and the Christian's
desire to get rid of him; while the same article specifically
states that the mutual jealousies of the great Powers,
based on a desire to "grab" (an economic motive), had
a great deal to do with preventing a peaceful settlement
of the difficulties. Yet "economics" have nothing to do
with it!</p>
<p>I have attempted elsewhere to make these two points—that
it is on the one hand the false economics of the
Turks and on the other hand the false economics of the
Powers of Europe, coloring the policy and statecraft
of both, which have played an enormous, in all human
probability, a determining rôle in the immediate cause
of the war; and, of course, a further and more remote
cause of the whole difficulty is the fact that the Balkan
peoples, never having been subjected to the discipline
of that complex social life which arises from trade and
commerce have not, or at least not so completely, outgrown
those primitive racial and religious hostilities
which at one time in Europe as a whole provoked conflicts
like that now raging in the Balkans. The following
article which appeared<a id="FNanchor_127_127"/><a href="#Footnote_127_127">[127]</a> at the outbreak of the war may
summarise some of the points with which we have been
dealing:—</p>
<blockquote><p>"Polite and good-natured people think it rude to say
'Balkans' if a Pacifist be present. Yet I never understood
why, and I understand now less than ever. It
carries the implication that because war has broken out
that fact disposes of all objection to it. The armies are
at grips, therefore peace is a mistake. Passion reigns
in the Balkans, therefore passion is preferable to reason.</p>
<p>"I suppose cannibalism and infanticide, polygamy,
judicial torture, religious persecution, witchcraft, during
all the years we did these 'inevitable' things, were defended
in the same way, and those who resented all
criticism of them pointed in triumph to the cannibal
feast, the dead child, the maimed witness, the slain heretic,
or the burned witch. But the fact did not prove the
wisdom of those habits, still less their inevitability; for
we have them no more.</p>
<p>"We are all agreed as to the fundamental cause of the
Balkan trouble: the hate born of religious, racial, national,
and linguistic differences; the attempt of an alien conqueror
to live parasitically upon the conquered, and the
desire of conqueror and conquered alike to satisfy in
massacre and bloodshed the rancor of fanaticism and
hatred.</p>
<p>"Well, in these islands, not so very long ago, those
things were causes of bloodshed; indeed, they were a
common feature of European life. But if they are
inevitable in human relationship, how comes it that
Adana is no longer duplicated by St. Bartholomew; the
Bulgarian bands by the vendetta of the Highlander and
the Lowlander; the struggle of the Slav and Turk,
Serb and Bulgar, by that of Scots and English, and
English and Welsh? The fanaticism of the Moslem
to-day is no more intense than that of Catholic and
heretic in Rome, Madrid, Paris, and Geneva at a time
which is only separated from us by the lives of three
or four elderly men. The heretic or infidel was then in
Europe also a thing unclean and horrifying, exciting in
the mind of the orthodox a sincere and honest hatred
and a (very largely satisfied) desire to kill. The Catholic
of the 16th century was apt to tell you that he could not
sit at table with a heretic because the latter carried with
him a distinctive and overpoweringly repulsive odor.
If you would measure the distance Europe has travelled,
think what this means: all the nations of Christendom
united in a war lasting 200 years for the capture of the
Holy Sepulchre; and yet, when in our day their representatives,
seated round a table, could have had it for the
asking, they did not deem it worth the asking, so little
of the ancient passion was there left. The very nature
of man seemed to be transformed. For, wonderful
though it be that orthodox should cease killing heretic,
infinitely more wonderful still is it that he should cease
wanting to kill him.</p>
<p>"Just as most of us are certain that the underlying
causes of this conflict are 'inevitable' and 'inherent in unchanging
human nature,' so are we certain that so <i>un</i>-human
a thing as economics can have no bearing on it.</p>
<p>"Well, I will suggest that the transformation of the
heretic-hating and heretic-killing European is due
mainly to economic forces; that it is because the drift
of those forces has to so great a degree left the Balkans,
where until yesterday the people lived a life little different
from that which they lived in the time of Abraham,
unaffected that war is now raging; that economic factors
of a more immediate kind form a large part of the provoking
cause of that war; and that a better comprehension
by great nations of Europe of certain economic
facts of their international relationship is essential before
much progress towards solution can be made.</p>
<p>"But then by 'economics' of course I mean, not a
merchant's profit or a money-lender's interest, but the
method by which men earn their bread, which must also
mean the kind of life they lead.</p>
<p>"We generally think of the primitive life of man—that
of the herdsman or the tent liver—as something idyllic.
The picture is as far as possible from the truth. Those
into whose lives economics do not enter, or enter very
little—that is to say, those who, like the Congo cannibal,
or the Red Indian, or the Bedouin, do not cultivate, or
divide their labor, or trade, or save, or look to the future,
have shed little of the primitive passions of other animals
of prey, the tigers and the wolves, who have no economics
at all, and have no need to check an impulse or a hate.
But industry, even of the more primitive kind, means
that men must divide their labor, which means that
they must put some sort of reliance upon one another;
the thing of prey becomes a partner, and the attitude
towards it changes. And as this life becomes more
complex, as the daily needs and desires push men to
trade and barter, that means building up a social organization,
rules and codes and courts to enforce them; as
the interdependence widens and deepens it necessarily
means the cessation of certain hostilities. If the neighboring
tribe wants to trade with you it must not kill
you; if you want the services of the heretic you must
not kill him, you must keep your obligation towards
him, and mutual good faith is death to long-sustained
hatreds.</p>
<p>"You cannot separate the moral from the social and
economic development of a people. The great service
of a complex social and industrial organization, which is
built up by the desire of men for better material conditions,
is not that it 'pays,' but that it makes a more
interdependent human society, and that it leads men
to recognize what is the best relationship among them.
The fact of recognizing that some act of aggression is
causing stocks to fall is not important because it may
save Oppenheim's or Solomon's money but because
it is a demonstration that we are dependent upon some
community on the other side of the world, that their
damage is our damage, and that we have an interest in
preventing it. It teaches us, as only some such simple
and mechanical means can teach, the lesson of human
fellowship.</p>
<p>"It is by such means as this that Western Europe has
in some measure, within its respective political frontiers,
learned that lesson. Each nation has learned, within its
own confines at least, that wealth is made by work, not
robbery; that, indeed, general robbery is fatal to prosperity;
that government consists not merely in having
the power of the sword but in organizing society—in
'knowing how,' which means the development of ideas;
in maintaining courts; in making it possible to run railways,
post-offices, and all the contrivances of a complex
society.</p>
<p>"Now rulers did not create these things; it was the
daily activities of the people, born of their desires and
made possible by the circumstances in which they lived,
by the trading and the mining and the shipping which
they carried on, that made them. But the Balkans have
been geographically outside the influence of European
industrial and commercial life. The Turk has hardly
felt it at all. He has learned none of the social and moral
lessons which interdependence and improved communications
have taught the Western European, and it is because
he had not learned these lessons, because he is a
soldier and a conqueror to an extent and completeness
that other nations of Europe lost a generation or two
since, that the Balkanese are fighting and that war is
raging.</p>
<p>"Not merely in this larger sense, but in the more immediate,
narrower sense, are the fundamental causes of
this war economic.</p>
<p>"This war arises, as the past wars against the Turkish
conqueror have arisen, from the desire of the Christian
peoples on whom he lives to shake off this burden. "To
live upon their subjects is the Turks' only means of
livelihood," says one authority. The Turk is an economic
parasite and the healthy economic organism must
end by rejecting him.</p>
<p>"The management of society, simple and primitive
even as that of the Balkan mountains, needs some effort
and work and capacity for administration; otherwise
even rudimentary economic life cannot be carried on.
The Turkish system, founded on the sword and nothing
else ('the finest soldier in Europe'), cannot give that
small modicum of energy or administrative capacity.
The one thing he knows is brute force; but it is not
by the strength of his muscles that an engineer runs a
machine, but by knowing how. The Turk cannot build
a road or make a bridge or administer a post-office or
found a court of law. And these things are necessary.
He will not let them be done by the Christian, who,
because he did not belong to the conquering class, has
had to work and has consequently come to possess whatever
capacity for work and administration the country
can show, because to do so would be to threaten the
Turk's only trade. In the Turk granted the Christians
equal political rights they would inevitably 'run the
country.' And yet the Turk himself cannot do it; and
he will not let others do it, because to do so would be to
threaten his supremacy.</p>
<p>"The more the use of force fails, the more, of course,
does he resort to it and that is why many of us who do
not believe in force and desire to see it disappear from
the relationship not merely of religious but of political
groups, might conceivably welcome this war of the
Balkan Christians, in so far as it is an attempt to resist
the use of force in those relationships. Of course, I do
not try to estimate the 'balance of criminality.' Right
is not all on one side—it never is. But the broad issue
is clear and plain. And only those concerned with the
name rather than the thing, with nominal and verbal
consistency rather than realities, will see anything paradoxical
or contradictory in Pacifist approval of Christian
resistance to the use of Turkish force.</p>
<p>"One fact stands out incontrovertibly from the whole
weary muddle. It is quite clear that the inability to act
in concert arises from the fact that in the international
sphere the European is still dominated by illusions which
he has dropped when he deals with home politics. The
political faith of the Turk, which he would never think
of applying at home as among the individuals of his
nation, he applies pure and unalloyed when he comes to
deal with foreigners as nations. The economic conception—using
the term in that wider sense which I have
indicated earlier in this article—which guides his individual
conduct is the antithesis of that which guides his
national conduct.</p>
<p>"While the Christian does not believe in robbery inside
the frontier, he does without; while within the State he
realizes that it is better for each to observe the general
code, so that civilized society can exist, than for each to
disregard it, so that society goes to pieces; while within
the State he realizes that government is a matter of
administration, not the seizure of property; that one
town does not add to its wealth by 'capturing' another,
that indeed one community cannot 'own' another—while,
I say, he believes all these things in his daily life
at home, he disregards them all when he comes to the
field of international relationship, <i>la haute politique</i>. To
annex some province by a cynical breach of treaty obligation
(Austria in Bosnia, Italy in Tripoli) is regarded as
better politics than to act loyally with the community
of nations to enforce their common interest in order and
good government. In fact, we do not believe that there
can be a community of nations, because, in fact, we do
not believe that their interests are common, but rival;
like the Turk, we believe that if you do not exercise
force upon your 'rival' he will exercise it upon you; that
nations live upon one another, not by co-operation with
one another—and it is for this reason presumably that
you must 'own' as much of your neighbors as possible.
It is the Turkish conception from beginning to end.</p>
<p>"It is because these false beliefs prevent the nations of
Christendom acting loyally the one to the other, because
each is playing for its own hand, that the Turk, with
hint of some sordid bribe, has been able to play off each
against the other.</p>
<p>"This is the crux of the matter. When Europe can
honestly act in common on behalf of common interests
some solution can be found. And the capacity of Europe
to act in harmony will not be found as long as the accepted
doctrines of European statecraft remain unchanged,
as long as they are dominated by existing
illusions."</p></blockquote>
<h2>FOOTNOTES:</h2>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_1_1"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_1">[1]</a> "The True Way of Life" (Headley Brothers, London), p. 29.
I am aware that many modern pacifists, even of the English school, to which these remarks mainly apply, are more objective in their
advocacy than Mr. Grubb, but in the eyes of the "average sensual
man" pacificism is still deeply tainted with this self-sacrificing
altruism (see Chapter III., Part III.), notwithstanding the admirable
work of the French pacifist school.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_2_2"/><a href="#FNanchor_2_2">[2]</a> The <i>Matin</i> newspaper recently made a series of revelations,
in which it was shown that the master of a French cod-fishing vessel
had, for some trivial insubordinations, disembowelled his cabin-boy
alive, and put salt into the intestines, and then thrown the quivering
body into the hold with the cod-fish. So inured were the crew to
brutality that they did not effectively protest, and the incident was
only brought to light months later by wine-shop chatter. The <i>Matin</i> quotes this as the sort of brutality that marks the Newfoundland
cod-fishing industry in French ships.
</p>
<p>Again, the German Socialist papers have recently been dealing
with what they term "The Casualties of the Industrial Battlefield,"
showing that the losses from industrial accidents since 1871—the
loss of life during peace, that is—have been enormously greater than
the losses due to the Franco-Prussian War.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_3_3"/><a href="#FNanchor_3_3">[3]</a> "The Interest of America in International Conditions." New
York: Harper &amp; Brothers.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_4_4"/><a href="#FNanchor_4_4">[4]</a> That is to say, all this was to have taken place before 1911
(the book appeared some years ago). This has its counterpart in
the English newspaper feuilleton which appeared some years ago
entitled, "The German Invasion of 1910."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_5_5"/><a href="#FNanchor_5_5">[5]</a> See letter to the <i>Matin</i>, August 22, 1908.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_6_6"/><a href="#FNanchor_6_6">[6]</a> In this self-seeking world, it is not reasonable to assume the
existence of an inverted altruism of this kind.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_7_7"/><a href="#FNanchor_7_7">[7]</a> This is not the only basis of comparison, of course. Everyone
who knows Europe at all is aware of the high standard of comfort
in all the small countries—Scandinavia, Holland, Belgium,
Switzerland. Mulhall, in "Industries and Wealth of Nations" (p.
391), puts the small States of Europe with France and England at the
top of the list, Germany <i>sixth</i>, and Russia, territorially and militarily
the greatest of all, at the very end. Dr. Bertillon, the French
statistician, has made an elaborate calculation of the relative wealth
of the individuals of each country. The middle-aged German
possesses (on the established average) nine thousand francs ($1800);
the Hollander <i>sixteen thousand</i> ($3200). (See <i>Journal</i>, Paris, August
1, 1910).</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_8_8"/><a href="#FNanchor_8_8">[8]</a> The figures given in the "Statesman's Year-Book" show that,
proportionately to population, Norway has nearly three times the
carrying trade of England.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_9_9"/><a href="#FNanchor_9_9">[9]</a> See citation, pp. 14-15.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_10_10"/><a href="#FNanchor_10_10">[10]</a> Major Stewart Murray, "Future Peace of the Anglo-Saxons."
London: Watts and Co.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_11_11"/><a href="#FNanchor_11_11">[11]</a> <i>L'Information</i>, August 22, 1909.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_12_12"/><a href="#FNanchor_12_12">[12]</a> Very many times greater, because the bullion reserve in the
Bank of England is relatively small.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_13_13"/><a href="#FNanchor_13_13">[13]</a> Hartley Withers, "The Meaning of Money." Smith, Elder and
Co., London.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_14_14"/><a href="#FNanchor_14_14">[14]</a> See pp. 75-76.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_15_15"/><a href="#FNanchor_15_15">[15]</a> See note concerning French colonial policy, pp. 122-124.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_16_16"/><a href="#FNanchor_16_16">[16]</a> Summarizing an article in the <i>Oriental Economic Review</i>, the
San Francisco <i>Bulletin</i> says: "Japan at this moment seems to be
finding out that 'conquered' Korea in every real sense belongs to
the Koreans, and that all that Japan is getting out of her war is
an additional burden of statesmanship and an additional expense
of administration, and an increased percentage of international
complication due to the extension of the Japanese frontier dangerously
close to her Continental rivals, China and Russia. Japan as
'owner' of Korea is in a worse position economically and politically
than she was when she was compelled to treat with Korea as an
independent nation." The <i>Oriental Economic Review</i> notes that "the
Japanese hope to ameliorate the Korean situation through the
general intermarriage of the two peoples; but this means a racial
advance, and through it closer social and economic relations than
were possible before annexation, and would probably have been
easier of accomplishment had not the destruction of Korean independence
embittered the people."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_17_17"/><a href="#FNanchor_17_17">[17]</a> Spanish Four per Cents. were 42½ during the war, and just
prior to the Moroccan trouble, in 1911, had a free market at 90 per
cent.</p>
<p>F.C. Penfold writes in the December (1910) <i>North American
Review</i> as follows: "The new Spain, whose motive force springs
not from the windmills of dreamy fiction, but from honest toil, is
materially better off this year than it has been for generations.
Since the war Spanish bonds have practically doubled in value,
and exchange with foreign money markets has improved in corresponding
ratio. Spanish seaports on the Atlantic and Mediterranean
teem with shipping. Indeed, the nature of the people seems changing
from a <i>dolce far niente</i> indolence to enterprising thrift."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_18_18"/><a href="#FNanchor_18_18">[18]</a> London <i>Daily Mail</i>, December 15, 1910.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_19_19"/><a href="#FNanchor_19_19">[19]</a> "Traité de Science des Finances," vol. ii., p. 682.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_20_20"/><a href="#FNanchor_20_20">[20]</a> "Die Wirtschafts Finanz und Sozialreform im Deutschen
Reich." Leipzig, 1882.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_21_21"/><a href="#FNanchor_21_21">[21]</a> "La Crise Économique," <i>Revue des Deux Mondes</i>, March 15,
1879.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_22_22"/><a href="#FNanchor_22_22">[22]</a> Maurice Block, "La Crise Économique," <i>Revue des Deux
Mondes</i>, March 15, 1879. See also "Les Conséquences Économiques
de la Prochaine Guerre," Captaine Bernard Serrigny.
Paris, 1909. The author says (p. 127): "It was evidently the
disastrous financial position of Germany, which had compelled
Prussia at the outbreak of the war to borrow money at the unheard-of
price of 11 per cent., that caused Bismarck to make the indemnity
so large a one. He hoped thus to repair his country's financial
situation. Events cruelly deceived him, however. A few months
after the last payment of the indemnity the gold despatched by
France had already returned to her territory, while Germany,
poorer than ever, was at grips with a crisis which was to a large
extent the direct result of her temporary wealth."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_23_23"/><a href="#FNanchor_23_23">[23]</a> "Das Deutsche Reich zur Zeit Bismarcks."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_24_24"/><a href="#FNanchor_24_24">[24]</a> The figures of German emigration are most suggestive in this
connection. Although they show great fluctuation, indicating their
reaction to many factors, they always appear to rise after the wars.
Thus, after the wars of the Duchies they doubled, for the five years
preceding the campaigns of 1865 they averaged 41,000, and after
those campaigns rose suddenly to over 100,000. They had fallen
to 70,000 in 1869, and then rose to 154,000 in 1872, and what is
more remarkable still, the emigration did not come from the conquered
provinces, from Schleswig-Holstein, Alsace or Lorraine, but
from Prussia! While not for a moment claiming that the effect of
the wars is the sole factor in this fluctuation, the fact of emigration
as bearing on the general claim made for successful war demands the
most careful examination. See particularly, "L'Émigration Allemande,"
<i>Revue des Deux Mondes</i>, January, 1874.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_25_25"/><a href="#FNanchor_25_25">[25]</a> The Montreal <i>Presse</i>, March 27, 1909.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_26_26"/><a href="#FNanchor_26_26">[26]</a> Speech, House of Commons, August 26, 1909. The New York
papers of November 16, 1909, report the following from Sir Wilfrid
Laurier in the Dominion Parliament during the debate on the
Canadian Navy: "If now we have to organize a naval force, it is
because we are growing as a nation—it is the penalty of being a
nation. I know of no nation having a sea-coast of its own which
has no navy, except Norway, but Norway will never tempt the
invader. Canada has its coal-mines, its gold-mines, its wheat-fields,
and its vast wealth may offer a temptation to the invader."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_27_27"/><a href="#FNanchor_27_27">[27]</a> The recent tariff negotiations between Canada and the United
States were carried on directly between Ottawa and Washington,
without the intervention of London. Canada regularly conducts her
tariff negotiations, even with other members of the British Empire.
South Africa takes a like attitude. The <i>Volkstein</i> of July 10, 1911,
says: "The Union constitution is in full accord with the principle
that neutrality is permissible in the case of a war in which England
and other independent States of the Empire are involved....
England, as well as South Africa, would best be served by South
Africa's neutrality" (quoted in <i>Times</i>, July 11, 1911). Note the
phrase "independent States of the Empire."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_28_28"/><a href="#FNanchor_28_28">[28]</a> <i>Times</i>, November 7, 1911.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_29_29"/><a href="#FNanchor_29_29">[29]</a> The London <i>World</i>, an Imperialist organ, puts it thus: "The
electoral process of reversing the results of the war is completed
in South Africa. By the result of last week's contests Mr. Merriman
has secured a strong working majority in both Houses. The
triumph of the Bond at Cape Town is no less sweeping than was
that of Het Volk at Pretoria. The three territories upon which the
future of the subcontinent depends are linked together under Boer
supremacy ... the future federated or uniformed system will be
raised upon a Dutch basis. If this was what we wanted, we might
have bought it cheaper than with two hundred and fifty millions of
money and twenty thousand lives."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_30_30"/><a href="#FNanchor_30_30">[30]</a> A Bill has been introduced into the Indian Legislative Council
enabling the Government to prohibit emigration to any country
where the treatment accorded to British Indian subjects was not
such as met with the approval of the Governor-General. "As just
treatment for free Indians has not been secured," says the London
<i>Times</i>, "prohibition will undoubtedly be applied against Natal
unless the position of free Indians there is ameliorated."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_31_31"/><a href="#FNanchor_31_31">[31]</a> Britain's total overseas trade for 1908 was $5,245,000,000, of
which $3,920,000,000 was with foreigners, and $1,325,000,000 with
her own possessions. And while it is true that with some of her
Colonies Britain has as much as 52 per cent. of their trade—<i>e.g.</i>,
Australia—it also happens that some absolutely foreign countries
do a greater percentage even of their trade with Britain than do her
Colonies. Britain possesses 38 per cent. of Argentina's foreign trade,
but only 36 per cent. of Canada's, although Canada has recently
given her a considerable preference.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_32_32"/><a href="#FNanchor_32_32">[32]</a> West Africa and Madagascar.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_33_33"/><a href="#FNanchor_33_33">[33]</a> It is a little encouraging, perhaps, for those of us who are doing
what we may towards the dissemination of saner ideas, that an
early edition of this book seems to have played some part in bringing
about the change in French colonial policy here indicated. The
French Colonial Ministry, for the purpose of emphasizing the point
of view mentioned in <i>Le Temps</i> article, on two or three occasions
called pointed attention to the first French edition of this book.
In the official report of the Colonial Budget for 1911, a large part of
this chapter is reprinted. In the Senate (see <i>Journal Officiel de la
République Française</i>, July 2, 1911) the Rapporteur again quoted
from this book at length, and devoted a great part of his speech
towards emphasizing the thesis here set out.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_34_34"/><a href="#FNanchor_34_34">[34]</a> A financier to whom I showed the proofs of this chapter notes
here: "If such a tax were imposed the output would be <i>nil</i>."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_35_35"/><a href="#FNanchor_35_35">[35]</a> A correspondent sent me some interesting and significant details
of the rapid strides made by Germany in Egypt. It had already
been stated that a German newspaper would appear in October, 1910,
and that the official notices of the mixed courts have been transferred
from the local French newspapers to the German <i>Egyptischer Nachrichten</i>.
During the years 1897-1907, German residents in Egypt
increased by 44 per cent., while British residents increased by
only 5 per cent. Germany's share of the Egyptian imports
during the period 1900-1904 was $3,443,880, but by 1909 this
figure reached $5,786,355. The latest German undertaking in
Egypt was the foundation of the Egyptische Hypotheken Bank, in
which all the principal joint-stock banks of Germany were interested.
Its capital was to be $2,500,000 and the six directors included
three Germans, one Austrian, and two Italians.</p>
<p>Writing of "Home Sickness among the Emigrants" (the <i>London
World</i>, July 19, 1910), Mr. F.G. Aflalo said:</p>
<p>"The Germans are, of all nations, the least troubled with this
weakness. Though far more warmly attached to the hearth than
their neighbors across the Rhine, they feel exile less. Their one
idea is to evade conscription, and this offers to all continental nations
a compensation for exile, which to the Englishman means nothing. I remember a colony of German fishermen on Lake Tahoe, the loveliest
water in California, where the pines of the Sierra Nevada must
have vividly recalled their native Harz. Yet they rejoiced in the
freedom of their adopted country, and never knew a moment's
regret for the Fatherland."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_36_36"/><a href="#FNanchor_36_36">[36]</a> According to a recent estimate, the Germans in Brazil now
number some four hundred thousand, the great majority being
settled in the southern states of Rio Grande do Sul, Paraná, and
Santa Catharina, while a small number are found in Sao Paulo
and Espirito Santo in the north. This population is, for the most
part, the result of natural increase, for of late years emigration
thither has greatly declined.</p>
<p>In Near Asia, too, German colonization is by no means of recent
origin. There are in Transcaucasia agricultural settlements established
by Würtemberg farmers, whose descendants in the third
generation live in their own villages and still speak their native
language. In Palestine, there are the German Templar Colonies on the coast, which have prospered so well as to excite the resentment
of the natives.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_37_37"/><a href="#FNanchor_37_37">[37]</a> London <i>Morning Post</i>, February 1, 1912.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_38_38"/><a href="#FNanchor_38_38">[38]</a> <i>North American Review</i>, March, 1912. See also citation, p. 15.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_39_39"/><a href="#FNanchor_39_39">[39]</a> April, 1912.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_40_40"/><a href="#FNanchor_40_40">[40]</a> "Germany and the Next War," by Gen. Friedrich von Bernhardi.
London: Edwin Arnold, 1912.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_41_41"/><a href="#FNanchor_41_41">[41]</a> See, notably, the article from Admiral Mahan, "The Place of
Power in International Relations," in the <i>North American Review</i>
for January, 1912; and such books of Professor Wilkinson's as "The
Great Alternative," "Britain at Bay," "War and Policy."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_42_42"/><a href="#FNanchor_42_42">[42]</a> "The Valor of Ignorance." Harpers.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_43_43"/><a href="#FNanchor_43_43">[43]</a> For an expression of these views in a more definite form, see
Ratzenhofer's "Die Sociologische Erkenntniss," pp. 233, 234.
Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1898.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_44_44"/><a href="#FNanchor_44_44">[44]</a> Speech at Stationer's Hall, London, June 6, 1910.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_45_45"/><a href="#FNanchor_45_45">[45]</a> "The Strenuous Life." Century Co.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_46_46"/><a href="#FNanchor_46_46">[46]</a> <i>McClure's Magazine</i>, August, 1910.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_47_47"/><a href="#FNanchor_47_47">[47]</a> Thomas Hughes, in his preface to the first English edition of
"The Bigelow Papers," refers to the opponents of the Crimean
War as a "vain and mischievous clique, who amongst us have
raised the cry of peace." See also Mr. J.A. Hobson's "Psychology
of Jingoism," p. 52. London: Grant Richards.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_48_48"/><a href="#FNanchor_48_48">[48]</a> <i>North American Review</i>, March, 1912.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_49_49"/><a href="#FNanchor_49_49">[49]</a> "The Interest of America in International Conditions." New
York: Harper &amp; Brothers.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_50_50"/><a href="#FNanchor_50_50">[50]</a> It is related by Critchfield, in his work on the South American
Republics, that during all the welter of blood and disorder which
for a century or more marked the history of those countries, the
Roman Catholic priesthood on the whole maintained a high standard
of life and character, and continued, against all discouragement, to
preach consistently the beauties of peace and order. However much
one may be touched by such a spectacle, and pay the tribute of one's
admiration to these good men, one cannot but feel that the preaching
of these high ideals did not have any very immediate effect on the
social progress of South America. What has effected this change?
It is that those countries have been brought into the economic current
of the world; the bank and factory and railroad have introduced
factors and motives of a quite different order from those urged by
the priest, and are slowly winning those countries from military
adventure to honest work, a thing which the preaching of high ideals
failed to do.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_51_51"/><a href="#FNanchor_51_51">[51]</a> "To-day and To-morrow," p. 63. John Murray.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_52_52"/><a href="#FNanchor_52_52">[52]</a> Since the publication of the first edition of this book there
has appeared in France an admirable work by M.J. Novikow, "Le
Darwinisme Social" (Felix Alcan, Paris), in which this application of
the Darwinian theory to sociology is discussed with great ability, and
at great length and in full detail, and the biological presentation of
the case, as just outlined, has been inspired in no small part by M.
Novikow's work. M. Novikow has established in biological terms
what, previous to the publication of his book, I attempted to establish
in economic terms.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_53_53"/><a href="#FNanchor_53_53">[53]</a> Co-operation does not exclude competition. If a rival beats
me in business, it is because he furnishes more efficient co-operation
than I do; if a thief steals from me, he is not co-operating at all,
and if he steals much will prevent my co-operation. The organism
(society) has every interest in encouraging the competitor and
suppressing the parasite.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_54_54"/><a href="#FNanchor_54_54">[54]</a> Without going to the somewhat obscure analogies of biological
science, it is evident from the simple facts of the world that, if at
any stage of human development warfare ever did make for the
survival of the fit, we have long since passed out of that stage.
When we conquer a nation in these days, we do not exterminate it:
we leave it where it was. When we "overcome" the servile races,
far from eliminating them, we give them added chances of life by
introducing order, etc., so that the lower human quality tends to be
perpetuated by conquest by the higher. If ever it happens that the
Asiatic races challenge the white in the industrial or military field,
it will be in large part thanks to the work of race conservation, which
has been the result of England's conquest in India, Egypt, and
Asia generally, and her action in China when she imposed commerical
contact on the Chinese by virtue of military power. War
between people of roughly equal development makes also for the
survival of the unfit, since we no longer exterminate and massacre
a conquered race, but only their best elements (those carrying on the
war), and because the conqueror uses up <i>his</i> best elements in the process,
so that the less fit of both sides are left to perpetuate the species.
Nor do the facts of the modern world lend any support to the theory
that preparation for war under modern conditions tends to preserve
virility, since those conditions involve an artificial barrack life, a
highly mechanical training favorable to the destruction of initiative,
and a mechanical uniformity and centralization tending to crush individuality, and to hasten the drift towards a centralized bureaucracy,
already too great.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_55_55"/><a href="#FNanchor_55_55">[55]</a> One might doubt, indeed, whether the British patriot has
really the feeling against the German that he has against his own
countrymen of contrary views. Mr. Leo Maxse, in the <i>National
Review</i> for February, 1911, indulges in the following expressions,
applied, not to Germans, but to English statesmen elected by a
majority of the English people: Mr. Lloyd George is a "fervid
Celt animated by passionate hatred of all things English"; Mr.
Churchill is simply a "Tammany Hall politician, without, however,
a Tammany man's patriotism." Mr. Harcourt belongs to "that
particular type of society demagogue who slangs Peers in public and
fawns upon them in private." Mr. Leo Maxse suggests that some of
the Ministers should be impeached and hanged. Mr. McKenna is
Lord Fisher's "poll-parrot," and the House of Commons is the
"poisonous Parliament of infamous memory," in which Ministers
were supported by a vast <i>posse comitatus</i> of German jackals.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_56_56"/><a href="#FNanchor_56_56">[56]</a> Speech at Stationers' Hall, London, June 6, 1910.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_57_57"/><a href="#FNanchor_57_57">[57]</a> I have in mind here the ridiculous furore that was made by
the British Jingo Press over some French cartoons that appeared at
the outbreak of the Boer War. It will be remembered that at that
time France was the "enemy," and Germany was, on the strength
of a speech by Mr. Chamberlain, a quasi-ally. Britain was at that time as warlike towards France as she is now towards Germany.
And this is only ten years ago!</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_58_58"/><a href="#FNanchor_58_58">[58]</a> In his "History of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit of Rationalism
in Europe," Lecky says: "It was no political anxiety about
the balance of power, but an intense religious enthusiasm that
impelled the inhabitants of Christendom towards the site which was
at once the cradle and the symbol of their faith. All interests were
then absorbed, all classes were governed, all passions subdued or
colored, by religious fervor. National animosities that had raged for centuries were pacified by its power. The intrigues of statesmen
and the jealousies of kings disappeared beneath its influence. Nearly
two million lives are said to have been sacrificed in the cause. Neglected
governments, exhausted finances, depopulated countries, were
cheerfully accepted as the price of success. No wars the world had
ever before seen were so popular as these, which were at the same
time the most disastrous and the most unselfish."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_59_59"/><a href="#FNanchor_59_59">[59]</a> "Be assured," writes St. Augustine, "and doubt not that not
only men who have obtained the use of their reason, but also little
children who have begun to live in their mother's womb and there
died, or who, having been just born, have passed away from the
world without the Sacrament of Holy Baptism, must be punished
by the eternal torture of undying fire." To make the doctrine
clearer, he illustrates it by the case of a mother who has two children.
Each of these is but a lump of perdition. Neither has ever performed
a moral or immoral act. The mother overlies one, and it perishes
unbaptized. It goes to eternal torment. The other is baptized and
saved.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_60_60"/><a href="#FNanchor_60_60">[60]</a> This appears sufficiently from the seasons in which, for instance,
<i>autos da fé</i> in Spain took place. In the Gallery of Madrid there
is a painting by Francisco Rizzi representing the execution, or
rather the procession to the stake, of a number of heretics during the
fêtes that followed the marriage of Charles II., and before the King,
his bride, and the Court and clergy of Madrid. The great square
was arranged like a theatre, and thronged with ladies in Court dress.
The King sat on an elevated platform, surrounded by the chief
members of the aristocracy.</p>
<p>Limborch, in his "History of the Inquisition," relates that among
the victims of one <i>auto da fé</i> was a girl of sixteen, whose singular
beauty struck all who saw her with admiration. As she passed to
the stake she cried to the Queen: "Great Queen, is not your presence
able to bring me some comfort under my misery? Consider my
youth, and that I am condemned for a religion which I have sucked
in with my mother's milk."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_61_61"/><a href="#FNanchor_61_61">[61]</a> <i>Spectator</i>, December 31, 1910.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_62_62"/><a href="#FNanchor_62_62">[62]</a> See quotations, pp. 161-162, from Homer Lea's book, "The
Valor of Ignorance."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_63_63"/><a href="#FNanchor_63_63">[63]</a> Thus Captain d'Arbeux ("L'Officier Contemporaine," Grasset,
Paris, 1911) laments "la disparition progressive de l'idéal de revanche,"
a military deterioration which is, he declares, working
the country's ruin. The general truth of all this is not affected
by the fact that 1911, owing to the Moroccan conflict and other
matters, saw a revival of Chauvinism, which is already spending
itself. The <i>Matin</i>, December, 1911, remarks: "The number of
candidates at St. Cyr and St. Maixent is decreasing to a terrifying
degree. It is hardly a fourth of what it was a few years ago....
The profession of arms has no longer the attraction that it had."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_64_64"/><a href="#FNanchor_64_64">[64]</a> "Germany and England," p. 19.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_65_65"/><a href="#FNanchor_65_65">[65]</a> See the first chapter of Mr. Harbutt Dawson's admirable work,
"The Evolution of Modern Germany." T. Fisher Unwin, London.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_66_66"/><a href="#FNanchor_66_66">[66]</a> I have excluded the "operations" with the Allies in China.
But they only lasted a few weeks. And were they war? This illustration
appears in M. Novikow's "Le Darwinisme Social."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_67_67"/><a href="#FNanchor_67_67">[67]</a> The most recent opinion on evolution would go to show that
environment plays an even larger rôle in the formation of character
than selection (see Prince Kropotkin's article, <i>Nineteenth Century</i>,
July, 1910, in which he shows that experiment reveals the direct
action of surroundings as the main factor of evolution). How
immensely, therefore, must our industrial environment modify the
pugnacious impulse of our nature!</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_68_68"/><a href="#FNanchor_68_68">[68]</a> See citations, pp. 161-166, notably Mr. Roosevelt's dictum:
"In this world the nation that is trained to a career of unwarlike
and isolated ease is bound to go down in the end before other nations
which have not lost the manly and adventurous qualities." This
view is even emphasized in the speech which Mr. Roosevelt recently
delivered at the University of Berlin (see London <i>Times</i>, May 13,
1910). "The Roman civilization," declared Mr. Roosevelt—perhaps,
as the <i>Times</i> remarks, to the surprise of those who have been
taught to believe that <i>latifundia perditere Romam</i>—"went down
primarily because the Roman citizen would not fight, because Rome
had lost the fighting edge." (See footnote, p. 237.)</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_69_69"/><a href="#FNanchor_69_69">[69]</a> "The Valor of Ignorance." Harpers.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_70_70"/><a href="#FNanchor_70_70">[70]</a> See M. Messimy's Report on the War Budget for 1908 (annexe
3, p. 474). The importance of these figures is not generally realized.
Astonishing as the assertion may sound, conscription in Germany is
not universal, while it is in France. In the latter country every man
of every class actually goes through the barracks, and is subjected to
the real discipline of military training; the whole training of the
nation is purely military. This is not the case in Germany. Very
nearly half of the young men of the country are not soldiers. Another
important point is that the part of the German nation which makes
up the country's intellectual life escapes the barracks. To all
practical purposes very nearly all young men of the better class enter
the army as one year volunteers, by which they escape more than a
few weeks of barracks, and even then escape its worst features. It
cannot be too often pointed out that intellectual Germany has never
been subjected to real barrack influence. As one critic says: "The
German system does not put this class through the mill," and is
deliberately designed to save them from the grind of the mill.
France's military activities since 1870 have, of course, been much
greater than those of Germany—Tonkin, Madagascar, Algeria,
Morocco. As against these, Germany has had only the Hereros
campaign. The percentages of population given above, in the text,
require modification as the Army Laws are modified, but the relative
positions in Germany and France remain about the same.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_71_71"/><a href="#FNanchor_71_71">[71]</a> <i>Vox de la Naçión</i>, Caracas, April 22, 1897.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_72_72"/><a href="#FNanchor_72_72">[72]</a> Even Mr. Roosevelt calls South American history mean and
bloody. It is noteworthy that, in his article published in the <i>Bachelor
of Arts</i> for March, 1896, Mr. Roosevelt, who lectured Englishmen so
vigorously on their duty at all costs not to be guided by sentimentalism
in the government of Egypt, should write thus at the time of
Mr. Cleveland's Venezuelan message to England: "Mean and
bloody though the history of the South American republics has been,
it is distinctly in the interest of civilization that ... they should be left to develop along their own lines.... Under the best of circumstances,
a colony is in a false position; but if a colony is a region
where the colonizing race has to do its work by means of other and
inferior races, the condition is much worse. There is no chance for
any tropical colony owned by a Northern race."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_73_73"/><a href="#FNanchor_73_73">[73]</a> June 2, 1910.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_74_74"/><a href="#FNanchor_74_74">[74]</a> See an article by Mr. Vernon Kellogg in the <i>Atlantic Monthly</i>,
July, 1913. Seeley says: "The Roman Empire perished for want of
men." One historian of Greece, discussing the end of the Peloponnesian wars, said: "Only cowards remain, and from their broods
came the new generations."</p>
<p>Three million men—the élite of Europe—perished in the Napoleonic
wars. It is said that after those wars the height standard of
the French adult population fell abruptly 1 inch. However that
may be, it is quite certain that the physical fitness of the French
people was immensely worsened by the drain of the Napoleonic wars,
since, as the result of a century of militarism, France is compelled
every few years to reduce the standard of physical fitness in order to
keep up her military strength, so that now even three-feet dwarfs are
impressed.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_75_75"/><a href="#FNanchor_75_75">[75]</a> I think one may say fairly that it <i>was</i> Sydney Smith's wit rather
than Bacon's or Bentham's wisdom which killed this curious illusion.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_76_76"/><a href="#FNanchor_76_76">[76]</a> See the distinction established at the beginning of the next
chapter.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_77_77"/><a href="#FNanchor_77_77">[77]</a> M. Pierre Loti, who happened to be at Madrid when the troops
were leaving to fight the Americans, wrote: "They are, indeed, still
the solid and splendid Spanish troops, heroic in every epoch; one
needs only to look at them to divine the woe that awaits the American
shopkeepers when brought face to face with such soldiers." He
prophesied <i>des surprises sanglantes</i>. M. Loti is a member of the
French Academy.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_78_78"/><a href="#FNanchor_78_78">[78]</a> See also letter quoted, pp. 230-231.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_79_79"/><a href="#FNanchor_79_79">[79]</a> "Patriotism and Empire." Grant Richards.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_80_80"/><a href="#FNanchor_80_80">[80]</a> "For permanent work the soldier is worse than useless; his whole
training tends to make him a weakling. He has the easiest of lives;
he has no freedom and no responsibility. He is, politically and
socially, a child, with rations instead of rights—treated like a child,
punished like a child, dressed prettily and washed and combed like a
child, excused for outbreaks of naughtiness like a child, forbidden to
marry like a child, and called "Tommy" like a child. He has no
real work to keep him from going mad except housemaid's work"
("John Bull's Other Island"). All those familiar with the large body
of French literature, dealing with the evils of barrack-life, know how
strongly that criticism confirms Mr. Bernard Shaw's generalization.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_81_81"/><a href="#FNanchor_81_81">[81]</a> September 11, 1899.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_82_82"/><a href="#FNanchor_82_82">[82]</a> Things must have reached a pretty pass in England when the
owner of the <i>Daily Mail</i> and the patron of Mr. Blatchford can devote
a column and a half over his own signature to reproaching in vigorous
terms the hysteria and sensationalism, of his own readers.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_83_83"/><a href="#FNanchor_83_83">[83]</a> The <i>Berliner Tageblatt</i> of March 14, 1911, says: "One must
admire the consistent fidelity and patriotism of the English race,
as compared with the uncertain and erratic methods of the German
people, their mistrust, and suspicion. In spite of numerous wars,
bloodshed, and disaster, England always emerges smoothly and
easily from her military crises and settles down to new conditions and
surroundings in her usual cool and deliberate manner.... Nor
can one refrain from paying one's tribute to the sound qualities and
character of the English aristocracy, which is always open to the
ambitious and worthy of other classes, and thus slowly but surely
widens the sphere of the middle classes by whom they are in consequence
honored and respected—a state of affairs practically unknown
in Germany, but which would be to our immense advantage."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_84_84"/><a href="#FNanchor_84_84">[84]</a> "Der Kaiser und die Zukunft des Deutschen Volkes."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_85_85"/><a href="#FNanchor_85_85">[85]</a> See also the confirmatory verdict of Captain March Phillips,
quoted on p. 291.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_86_86"/><a href="#FNanchor_86_86">[86]</a> "My Life in the Army," p. 119.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_87_87"/><a href="#FNanchor_87_87">[87]</a> I do not think this last generalization does any injustice to the
essay, "Latitude and Longitude among Reformers" ("Strenuous
Life," pp. 41-61. The Century Company).</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_88_88"/><a href="#FNanchor_88_88">[88]</a> See for further illustration of the difference and its bearing in
practical politics Chapter VIII., Part I., "The Fight for the Place
in the Sun."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_89_89"/><a href="#FNanchor_89_89">[89]</a> See Chapter VII., Part I.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_90_90"/><a href="#FNanchor_90_90">[90]</a> Aristotle did, however, have a flash of the truth. He said: "If
the hammer and the shuttle could move themselves, slavery would
be unnecessary."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_91_91"/><a href="#FNanchor_91_91">[91]</a> "Facts and Comments," p. 112.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_92_92"/><a href="#FNanchor_92_92">[92]</a> Buckle ("History of Civilization") points out that Philip II.,
who ruled half the world and drew tribute from the whole of South
America, was so poor that he could not pay his personal servants or
meet the daily expenses of the Court!</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_93_93"/><a href="#FNanchor_93_93">[93]</a> I mean by credit all the mechanism of exchange which replaces
the actual use or metal, or notes representing it.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_94_94"/><a href="#FNanchor_94_94">[94]</a> Lecky ("Rationalism in Europe," p. 76) says: "Protestantism
could not possibly have existed without a general diffusion of the
Bible, and that diffusion was impossible until after the two inventions
of paper and printing.... Before those inventions, pictures
and material images were the chief means of religious instruction."
And thus religious belief became necessarily material, crude,
anthropomorphic.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_95_95"/><a href="#FNanchor_95_95">[95]</a> "Battles are no longer the spectacular heroics of the past. The
army of to-day and to-morrow is a sombre gigantic machine devoid
of melodramatic heroics ... a machine that it requires years to form
in separate parts, years to assemble them together, and other years
to make them work smoothly and irresistibly" (Homer Lea in
"The Valor of Ignorance," p. 49).</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_96_96"/><a href="#FNanchor_96_96">[96]</a> General von Bernhardi, in his work on cavalry, deals with this
very question of the bad influence on tactics of the "pomp of war,"
which he admits must disappear, adding very wisely: "The spirit
of tradition consists not in the retention of antiquated forms, but in
acting in that spirit which in the past led to such glorious success."
The plea for the retention of the soldier because of his "spirit" could
not be more neatly disposed of. See p. 111 of the English edition of
Bernhardi's work (Hugh Rees, London).</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_97_97"/><a href="#FNanchor_97_97">[97]</a> See quotations, pp. 161-166.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_98_98"/><a href="#FNanchor_98_98">[98]</a> The following letter to the <i>Manchester Guardian</i>, which appeared
at the time of the Boer War, is worth reproduction in this connection:</p>
<p>"Sir,—I see that 'The Church's Duty in regard to War' is to be
discussed at the Church Congress. This is right. For a year the
heads of our Church have been telling us what war is and does—that
it is a school of character; that it sobers men, cleans them,
strengthens them, knits their hearts; makes them brave, patient,
humble, tender, prone to self-sacrifice. Watered by 'war's red
rain,' one Bishop tells us, virtue grows; a cannonade, he points
out, is an 'oratorio'—almost a form of worship. True; and to
the Church men look for help to save their souls from starving
for lack of this good school, this kindly rain, this sacred music.
Congresses are apt to lose themselves in wastes of words. This
one must not, surely cannot, so straight is the way to the goal.
It has simply to draft and submit a new Collect for war in our
time, and to call for the reverent but firm emendation, in the spirit
of the best modern thought, of those passages in Bible and
Prayer-Book by which even the truest of Christians and the best
of men have at times been blinded to the duty of seeking war and
ensuing it. Still, man's moral nature cannot, I admit, live by war
alone; nor do I say with some that peace is wholly bad. Even amid
the horrors of peace you will find little shoots of character fed by the
gentle and timely rains of plague and famine, tempest and fire;
simple lessons of patience and courage conned in the schools of
typhus, gout, and stone; not oratorios, perhaps, but homely anthems
and rude hymns played on knife and probe in the long winter nights.
Far from me to 'sin our mercies,' or to call mere twilight dark. Yet
dark it may become; for remember that even these poor makeshift schools of character, these second-bests, these halting substitutes for
war—remember that the efficiency of every one of them, be it hunger,
accident, ignorance, sickness, or pain, is menaced by the intolerable
strain of its struggles with secular doctors, plumbers, inventors,
schoolmasters, and policemen. Every year thousands who would
once have been braced and steeled by manly tussles with small-pox
or diphtheria are robbed of that blessing by the great changes made
in our drains. Every year thousands of women and children must go
their way bereft of the rich spiritual experience of the widow and
the orphan."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_99_99"/><a href="#FNanchor_99_99">[99]</a> Captain March Phillips, "With Remington." Methuen. See
pp. 259-60 for Mr. Blatchford's confirmation of this verdict.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_100_100"/><a href="#FNanchor_100_100">[100]</a> And here as to the officers—again not from me but from a very
Imperialist and militarist quarter—the London <i>Spectator</i> (November
25, 1911), says: "Soldiers might be supposed to be free from pettiness
because they are men of action. But we all know that there is no
profession in which the leaders are more depreciated by one another
than in the profession of arms."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_101_101"/><a href="#FNanchor_101_101">[101]</a> Professor William James says: "Greek history is a panorama
of war for war's sake ... of the utter ruin of a civilization which
in intellectual respects was perhaps the highest the earth has ever
seen. The wars were purely piratical. Pride, gold, women, slaves,
excitement were their only motives."—<i>McClure's Magazine</i>,
August, 1910.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_102_102"/><a href="#FNanchor_102_102">[102]</a> "Britain at Bay." Constable and Co.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_103_103"/><a href="#FNanchor_103_103">[103]</a> See quotation from Sir C.P. Lucas, p. 111-12.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_104_104"/><a href="#FNanchor_104_104">[104]</a> See details on this matter given in Chapter VII., Part I.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_105_105"/><a href="#FNanchor_105_105">[105]</a> London <i>Morning Post</i>, April 21, 1910. I pass over the fact that
to cite all this as a reason for armaments is absurd. Does the
<i>Morning Post</i> really suggest that the Germans are going to attack
England because they don't like the English taste in art, or music,
or cooking? The notion that preferences of this sort need the protection
of <i>Dreadnoughts</i> is surely to bring the whole thing within
the domain of the grotesque.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_106_106"/><a href="#FNanchor_106_106">[106]</a> I refer to the remarkable speech in which Mr. Chamberlain
notified France that she must "mend her manners or take the consequences"
(see London daily papers between November 28 and
December 5, 1899).</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_107_107"/><a href="#FNanchor_107_107">[107]</a> Not that a very great period separates us from such methods.
Froude quotes Maltby's Report to Government as follows: "I
burned all their corn and houses, and committed to the sword all
that could be found. In like manner I assailed a castle. When
the garrison surrendered, I put them to the misericordia of my soldiers.
They were all slain. Thence I went on, sparing none which
came in my way, which cruelty did so amaze their fellows that they
could not tell where to bestow themselves." Of the commander of
the English forces at Munster we read: "He diverted his forces into
East Clanwilliam, and harassed the country; killed all mankind that
were found therein ... not leaving behind us man or beast, corn or
cattle ... sparing none of what quality, age, or sex soever. Beside
many burned to death, we killed man, woman, child, horse, or beast
or whatever we could find."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_108_108"/><a href="#FNanchor_108_108">[108]</a> In "The Evolution of Modern Germany" (Fisher Unwin, London)
the same author says: "Germany implies not one people, but
many peoples ... of different culture, different political and social
institutions ... diversity of intellectual and economic life.... When
the average Englishman speaks of Germany he really means Prussia,
and consciously or not he ignores the fact that in but few things can
Prussia be regarded as typical of the whole Empire."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_109_109"/><a href="#FNanchor_109_109">[109]</a> "International Law." John Murray, London.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_110_110"/><a href="#FNanchor_110_110">[110]</a> Lord Sanderson, dealing with the development of international
intercourse in an address to the Royal Society of Arts (November 15,
1911), said: "The most notable feature of recent international intercourse,
he thought, was the great increase in international exhibitions,
associations, and conferences of every description and on
every conceivable subject. When he first joined the Foreign
Office, rather more than fifty years ago, conferences were confined
almost entirely to formal diplomatic meetings to settle some urgent
territorial or political question in which several States were interested.
But as time had passed, not only were the number and
frequency of political conferences increased, but a host of meetings of
persons more or less official, termed indiscriminately conferences
and congresses, had come into being."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_111_111"/><a href="#FNanchor_111_111">[111]</a> January 8, 1910.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_112_112"/><a href="#FNanchor_112_112">[112]</a> March 10, 1910.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_113_113"/><a href="#FNanchor_113_113">[113]</a> "The German Government is straining every nerve, with the
zealous support of its people, to get ready for a fight with this
country" (<i>Morning Post</i>, March 1, 1912). "The unsatiated will
of the armed State will, when an opportunity offers, attack most
likely its most satiated neighbors without scruple, and despoil them
without ruth" (Dr. Dillon, <i>Contemporary Review</i>, October, 1911).</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_114_114"/><a href="#FNanchor_114_114">[114]</a> I have shown in a former chapter (Chapter VI., Part II.) how
these international hatreds are not the cause of conflict, but the
outcome of conflicts or presumed conflicts of policy. If difference
of national psychology—national "incompatibility of temper"—were
the cause, how can we explain the fact that ten years since
the English were still "hating all Frenchmen like the devil," and
talking of alliance with the Germans? If diplomatic shuffling had pushed England into alliance with the Germans against the French, it
would never have occurred to the people that they had to "detest the
Germans."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_115_115"/><a href="#FNanchor_115_115">[115]</a> The German Navy Law in its preamble might have filched
this from the British Navy League catechism.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_116_116"/><a href="#FNanchor_116_116">[116]</a> In an article published in 1897 (January 16) the London <i>Spectator</i>
pointed out the hopeless position Germany would occupy if England
cared to threaten her. The organ, which is now apt to resent the
increased German Navy as implying aggression upon England, then
wrote as follows: "Germany has a mercantile marine of vast proportions.
The German flag is everywhere. But on the declaration
of war the whole of Germany's trading ships would be at our mercy.
Throughout the seas of the world our cruisers would seize and confiscate
German ships. Within the first week of the declaration of
war Germany would have suffered a loss of many million pounds by
the capture of her ships. Nor is that all. Our Colonies are dotted
with German trading-houses, who, in spite of a keen competition, do
a great deal of business.... We should not, of course, want to
treat them harshly; but war must mean for them the selling of their
businesses for what they would fetch and going home to Germany.
In this way Germany would lose a hold upon the trade of the world
which it has taken her many years of toil to create.... Again,
think of the effect upon Germany's trade of the closing of all her
ports. Hamburg is one of the greatest ports of the world. What
would be its condition if practically not a single ship could leave or
enter it? Blockades are no doubt very difficult things to maintain
strictly, but Hamburg is so placed that the operation would be
comparatively easy. In truth the blockade of all the German ports
on the Baltic or the North Sea would present little difficulty....
Consider the effect on Germany if her flag were swept from the high
seas and her ports blockaded. She might not miss her colonies, for
they are only a burden, but the loss of her sea-borne trade would be an
equivalent to an immediate fine of at least a hundred million sterling.
In plain words, a war with Germany, even when conducted by her
with the utmost wisdom and prudence, must mean for her a direct
loss of a terribly heavy kind, and for us virtually no loss at all."
This article is full of the fallacies which I have endeavored to expose
in this book, but it logically develops the notions which are prevalent
in both England and Germany; and yet Germans have to listen to an
English Minister of Marine describing their Navy as a luxury!</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_117_117"/><a href="#FNanchor_117_117">[117]</a> Here is the real English belief in this matter: "Why should
Germany attack Britain? Because Germany and Britain are
commercial and political rivals; because Germany covets the trade,
the Colonies, and the Empire which Britain now possesses.... As
to arbitration, limitation of armament, it does not require a very
great effort of the imagination to enable us to see that proposal with
German eyes. Were I a German, I should say: 'These islanders are
cool customers. They have fenced in all the best parts of the globe,
they have bought or captured fortresses and ports in five continents,
they have gained the lead in commerce, they have a virtual monopoly
of the carrying trade of the world, they hold command of the seas,
and now they propose that we shall all be brothers, and that nobody
shall fight or steal any more,'" (Robert Blatchford, "Germany and
England," pp. 4-13).</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_118_118"/><a href="#FNanchor_118_118">[118]</a> "Facts and Fallacies." An answer to "Compulsory Service,"
by Field-Marshal Earl Roberts, V.C., K.G.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_119_119"/><a href="#FNanchor_119_119">[119]</a> Discussing the first edition of this book, Sir Edward Grey
said: "True as the statement in that book may be, it does not
become an operative motive in the minds and conduct of nations until they are convinced of its truth and it has become a commonplace
to them" (Argentine Centenary Banquet, May 20, 1910).</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_120_120"/><a href="#FNanchor_120_120">[120]</a> Lecky, "History of the Progress of Rationalism in Europe."</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_121_121"/><a href="#FNanchor_121_121">[121]</a> I do not desire in the least, of course, to create the impression
that I regard the truths here elaborated as my "discovery," as
though no one had worked in this field before. Properly speaking,
there is no such thing as priority in ideas. The interdependence
of peoples was proclaimed by philosophers three thousand years
ago. The French school of pacifists—Passy, Follin, Yves Guyot,
de Molinari, and Estournelles de Constant—have done splendid
work in this field; but no one of them, so far as I know, has undertaken
the work of testing in detail the politico-economic orthodoxy
by the principle of the economic futility of military force; by bringing
that principle to bear on the everyday problems of European statecraft.
If there is such an one—presenting the precise notes of
interrogation which I have attempted to present here—I am not
aware of it. This does not prevent, I trust, the very highest appreciation
of earlier and better work done in the cause of peace generally.
The work of Jean de Bloch, among others, though covering different
ground from this, possesses an erudition and bulk of statistical evidence
to which this can make no claim. The work of J. Novikow, to
my mind the greatest of all, has already been touched upon.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_122_122"/><a href="#FNanchor_122_122">[122]</a> "Turkey in Europe," pp. 88-9 and 91-2.</p>
<p>It is significant, by the way, that the "born soldier" has now been
crushed by a non-military race whom he has always despised as
having no military tradition. Capt. F.W. von Herbert ("Bye
Paths in the Balkans") wrote (some years before the present war):
"The Bulgars, as Christian subjects of Turkey exempt from military
service, have tilled the ground under stagnant and enfeebling peace
conditions, and the profession of arms is new to them."</p>
<p>"Stagnant and enfeebling peace conditions" is, in view of subsequent
events, distinctly good.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_123_123"/><a href="#FNanchor_123_123">[123]</a> I dislike to weary the reader with such damnable iteration,
but when a British Cabinet Minister is unable in this discussion to
distinguish between the folly of a thing and its possibility, one <i>must</i>
make the fundamental point clear.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_124_124"/><a href="#FNanchor_124_124">[124]</a> This Appendix was written before the Balkan States fell to
fighting one another. It is scarcely necessary to point out that the
events of the last few days (early summer 1913) lend significance
to the argument in the text.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_125_125"/><a href="#FNanchor_125_125">[125]</a> See p. 390.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_126_126"/><a href="#FNanchor_126_126">[126]</a> <i>Review of Reviews</i>, November, 1912.</p></div>
<div class="footnote"><p><a id="Footnote_127_127"/><a href="#FNanchor_127_127">[127]</a> In the <i>Daily Mail</i>, to whose Editor I am indebted for permission
to reprint it.</p></div>
