<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>CHAPTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
			<p>ARMAMENT, BUT NOT ALONE ARMAMENT</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Not the facts, but men’s belief about facts, shapes their conduct⁠—Solving a problem of two factors by ignoring one⁠—The fatal outcome of such a method⁠—The German Navy as a “luxury”⁠—If both sides concentrate on armament alone.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Not the facts, but men’s opinions about the facts, are what matter,” one thinker has remarked. And this is because men’s conduct is determined, not necessarily by the right conclusion from facts, but the conclusion they believe to be right.</p>
			<p>When men burned witches, their conduct was exactly what it would have been if what they believed to be true <i>had</i> been true. The truth made no difference to their behavior, so long as they could not see the truth. And so in politics. As long as Europe is dominated by the old beliefs, those beliefs will have virtually the same effect in politics as though they were intrinsically sound.</p>
			<p>And just as in the matter of burning witches a change of behavior was the outcome of a change of opinion, in its turn the result of a more scientific investigation of the facts, so in the same way a change in the political conduct of Europe can only come about as the result of a change of thought; and that change of thought will not come about so long as the energies of men in this matter are centred only upon perfecting instruments of warfare. It is not merely that better ideas can only result from more attention being given to the real meaning of facts, but that the direct tendency of war preparation⁠—with the suspicion it necessarily engenders and the ill-temper to which it almost always gives rise⁠—is to create both mechanical and psychological checks to improvement of opinion and understanding. Here, for instance, is General von Bernhardi, who has just published his book in favor of war as the regenerator of nations, urging that Germany should attack certain of her enemies before they are ready to attack her. Suppose the others reply by increasing their military force? It suits Bernhardi entirely. For what is the effect of this increase on the minds of Germans possibly disposed to disagree with Bernhardi? It is to silence them and to strengthen Bernhardi’s hands. His policy, originally wrong, has become relatively right, because his arguments have been answered by force. For the silence of his might-be critics will still further encourage those of other nations who deem themselves threatened by this kind of opinion in Germany to increase their armaments; and these increases will still further tend to strengthen Bernhardi’s school, and still further silence his critics. The process by which force tends to crush reason is, unhappily, cumulative and progressive. The vicious circle can only be broken by the introduction somewhere of the factor of reason.</p>
			<p>And this is precisely, my critics urge, why we need do nothing but concentrate on the instruments of force!</p>
			<p>The all but invariable attitude adopted by the man in the street in this whole discussion is about as follows:</p>
			<p>“What, as practical men, we have to do, is to be stronger than our enemy; the rest is theory, and does not matter.”</p>
			<p>Well, the inevitable outcome of such an attitude is catastrophe. It leads us not toward, but away from, solution.</p>
			<p>In the first edition of this book I wrote:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Are we immediately to cease preparation for war, since our defeat cannot advantage our enemy nor do us in the long run much harm? No such conclusion results from a study of the considerations elaborated here. It is evident that so long as the misconception we are dealing with is all but universal in Europe, so long as the nations believe that in some way the military and political subjugation of others will bring with it a tangible material advantage to the conqueror, we all do, in fact, stand in danger from such aggression. Not his interest, but what he deems to be his interest, will furnish the real motive of our prospective enemy’s action. And as the illusion with which we are dealing does, indeed, dominate all those minds most active in European politics, we (in England) must, while this remains the case, regard an aggression, even such as that which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harrison foresees, as within the bounds of practical politics. (What is not within the bounds of possibility is the extent of devastation which he foresees as the result of such attack, which, I think, the foregoing pages sufficiently demonstrate.)</p>
				<p>On this ground alone I deem that England, or any other nation, is justified in taking means of self-defence to prevent such aggression. This is not, therefore, a plea for disarmament irrespective of the action of other nations. So long as current political philosophy in Europe remains what it is, I would not urge the reduction of the British war budget by a single sovereign.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I see no reason to alter a word of this. But if preparation of the machinery of war is to be the only form of energy in this matter⁠—if national effort is to neglect all other factors whatsoever⁠—more and more will sincere and patriotic men have doubts as to whether they are justified in co-operating in further piling up the armaments of any country. Of the two risks involved⁠—the risk of attack arising from a possible superiority of armament on the part of a rival, and the risk of drifting into conflict because, concentrating all our energies on the mere instrument of combat, we have taken no adequate trouble to understand the facts of this case⁠—it is at least an arguable proposition that the second risk is the greater. And I am prompted to this expression of opinion without surrendering one iota of a lifelong and passionate belief that a nation attacked should defend itself to the last penny and to the last man.</p>
			<p>In this matter it seems fatally easy to secure either one of two kinds of action: that of the “practical man” who limits his energies to securing a policy which will perfect the machinery of war and disregard anything else; or that of the Pacifist, who, persuaded of the brutality or immorality of war, is apt to deprecate effort directed at self-defence. What is needed is the type of activity which will include both halves of the problem: provision for education, for a Political Reformation in this matter, <i>as well as</i> such means of defence as will meantime counterbalance the existing impulse to aggression. To concentrate on either half to the exclusion of the other half is to render the whole problem insoluble.</p>
			<p>What must inevitably happen if the nations take the line of the “practical man,” and limit their energies simply and purely to piling up armaments?</p>
			<p>A British critic once put to me what he evidently deemed a poser: “Do you urge that we shall be stronger than our enemy, or weaker?”</p>
			<p>To which I replied: “The last time that question was asked me was in Berlin, by Germans. What would you have had me reply to those Germans?”⁠—a reply which, of course, meant this: In attempting to find the solution of this question in terms of one party, you are attempting the impossible. The outcome will be war, and war would not settle it. It would all have to be begun over again.</p>
			<p>The British Navy League catechism says: “Defence consists in being so strong that it will be dangerous for your enemy to attack you.”<a id="FNanchor_115_115"/><a href="#Footnote_115_115">[115]</a> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Churchill, even, goes farther than the Navy League, and says: “The way to make war impossible is to make victory certain.”</p>
			<p>The Navy League definition is at least possible of application to practical politics, because rough equality of the two parties would make attack by either dangerous. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Churchill’s principle is impossible of application to practical politics, because it could only be applied by one party, and would, in the terms of the Navy League principle, deprive the other party of the right of defence. As a matter of simple fact, both the British Navy League, by its demand for two ships to one, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Churchill, by his demand for certain victory, deny in this matter Germany’s right to defend herself; and such denial is bound, on the part of a people animated by like motives to themselves, to provoke a challenge. When the British Navy League says, as it does, that a self-respecting nation should not depend upon the goodwill of foreigners for its safety, but upon its own strength, it recommends Germany to maintain her efforts to arrive at some sort of equality with England. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Churchill goes farther, and says that a nation is entitled to be so strong as to make victory over its rivals certain, he knows that if Germany were to adopt his own doctrine, its certain outcome would be war.</p>
			<p>In anticipation of such an objection, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Churchill says that preponderant power at sea is a luxury to Germany, a necessity to Britain; that these efforts of Germany are, as it were, a mere whim in no way dictated by the real necessities of her people, and having behind them no impulse wrapped up with national needs.<a id="FNanchor_116_116"/><a href="#Footnote_116_116">[116]</a></p>
			<p>If that be the truth, then it is the strongest argument imaginable for the settlement of this Anglo-German rivalry by agreement: by bringing about that Political Reformation of Europe which it is the object of these pages to urge.</p>
			<p>Here are those of the school of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Churchill who say: The danger of aggression from Germany is so great that England must have an enormous preponderance of force⁠—two to one; so great are the risks Germany is prepared to take, that unless victory on the English side is certain she will attack. And yet, explain this same school, the impulse which creates these immense burdens and involves these immense risks is a mere whim, a luxury; the whole thing is dissociated from any real national need.</p>
			<p>If that really be the case, then, indeed, is it time for a campaign of Education in Europe; time that the sixty-five millions, more or less, of hard-working and not very rich people, whose money support alone makes this rivalry possible, learned what it is all about. This “whim” has cost the two nations, in the last ten years, a sum larger than the indemnity France paid to Germany. Does <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Churchill suppose that these millions know, or think, this struggle one for a mere luxury, or whim? And if they did know, would it be quite a simple matter for the German Government to keep up the game?</p>
			<p>But those who, during the last decade in England, have in and out of season carried on this active campaign for the increase of British armaments, do <i>not</i> believe that Germany’s action is the result of a mere whim. They, being part of the public opinion of Europe, subscribe to the general European doctrine that Germany is pushed to do these things by real national necessities, by her need for expansion, for finding food and livelihood for all these increasing millions. And if this is so, the English are asking Germany, in surrendering this contest, to betray future German generations⁠—wilfully to withhold from them those fields which the strength and fortitude of this generation might win. If this common doctrine is true, the English are asking Germany to commit national suicide.<a id="FNanchor_117_117"/><a href="#Footnote_117_117">[117]</a></p>
			<p>Why should it be assumed that Germany will do it? That she will be less persistent in protecting her national interest, her posterity, be less faithful than the British themselves to great national impulses? Has not the day gone by when educated men can calmly assume that any Englishman is worth three foreigners? And yet such an assumption, ignorant and provincial as we are bound to admit it to be, is the only one that can possibly justify this policy of concentrating upon armament alone.</p>
			<p>Even Admiral Fisher can write:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>The supremacy of the British Navy is the best security for the peace of the world.⁠ ⁠… If you rub it in, both at home and abroad, that you are ready for instant war, with every unit of your strength in the first line and waiting to be first in, and hit your enemy in the belly and kick him when he is down, and boil your prisoners in oil (if you take any), and torture his women and children, then people will keep clear of you.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Would Admiral Fisher refrain from taking a given line merely because, if he took it, someone would “hit him in the belly,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>? He would repudiate the idea with the utmost scorn, and probably reply that the threat would give him an added incentive to take the line in question. But why should Admiral Fisher suppose that he has a monopoly of courage, and that a German Admiral would act otherwise than he? Is it not about time that each nation abandoned the somewhat childish assumption that it has a monopoly of the courage and the persistence in the world, and that things which would never frighten or deter it will frighten and deter its rivals?</p>
			<p>Yet in this matter the English assume either that the Germans will be less persistent than they, or that in this contest their backs will break first. A coadjutor of Lord Roberts is calmly talking of a Naval Budget of 400 or 500 million dollars, and universal service as well, as a possibility of the all but immediate future.<a id="FNanchor_118_118"/><a href="#Footnote_118_118">[118]</a> If England can stand that now, why should not Germany, who is, we are told, growing industrially more rapidly than the English, be able to stand as much? But when she has arrived at that point, the English, at the same rate, must have a naval budget of anything from 750 to 1000 million dollars, a total armament budget of something in the region of 1250 millions. The longer it goes on, the worse will be England’s relative position, because she has imposed on herself a progressive handicap.</p>
			<p>The end can only be conflict, and already the policy of precipitating that conflict is raising its head.</p>
			<p>Sir Edmund C. Cox writes in the premier English review, the <i>Nineteenth Century</i>, for April, 1910:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Is there no alternative to this endless yet futile competition in shipbuilding? Yes, there is. It is one which a Cromwell, a William Pitt, a Palmerston, a Disraeli, would have adopted long ago. This is that alternative⁠—the only possible conclusion. It is to say to Germany: “All that you have been doing constitutes a series of unfriendly acts. Your fair words go for nothing. Once for all, you must put an end to your warlike preparations. If we are not satisfied that you do so, we shall forthwith sink every battleship and cruiser which you possess. The situation which you have created is intolerable. If you determine to fight us, if you insist upon war, war you shall have; but the time shall be of our choosing and not of yours, and that time shall be now.” And that is where the present policy, the sheer bulldog piling up of armaments without reference to or effort towards a better political doctrine in Europe, inevitably leads.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
