<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Preface to the Fourth American Edition</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="preface-1" epub:type="preface">
			<h2>Preface to the Fourth American Edition</h2>
			<p>If this, the fourth American edition, is bulkier than its predecessors, it is chiefly because the events of the last two years throw an interesting light upon the bearing of the book’s main thesis on actual world problems. I have, therefore, added an appendix dealing with certain criticisms based upon the nature of the first Balkan War, in the course of which I attempt to show just how the principles elaborated here have been working out in European politics.</p>
			<p>That American interest in the problems here discussed is hardly less vital than that of Europe I am even more persuaded than when the first American edition of this book was issued in 1910. It is certain that opinion in America will not be equipped for dealing with her own problems arising out of her relations with the Spanish American states, with Japan, with the Philippines, unless it has some fair understanding of the principles with which this book deals. Its general interest even goes farther than this: no great community like that of modern America can remain indifferent to the drift of general opinion throughout the world on matters wrapped up with issues so important as those of war and peace.</p>
			<p>That the tangible commercial and business interests of America are involved in these European events is obvious from the very factors of financial and commercial interdependence which form the basis of the argument.</p>
			<p>That the interests of Americans are inextricably, if indirectly, bound up with those of Europe, has become increasingly clear as can be proved by the barest investigation of the trend of political thought in this country.</p>
			<p>The thesis on its economic side is discussed in terms of the gravest problem which now faces European statesmanship, but these terms are also the living symbols of a principle of universal application, as true with reference to American conditions as to European. If I have not “localized” the discussion by using illustrations drawn from purely American cases, it is because these problems have not at present, in the United States, reached the acute stage that they have in Europe, and illustrations drawn from the conditions of an actual and pressing problem give to any discussion a reality which to some extent it might lose if discussed on the basis of more supposititious cases.</p>
			<p>It so happens, however, that in the more abstract section of the discussion embraced in the second part, which I have termed the “Human Nature of the Case,” I have gone mainly to American authors for the statement of cases based on those illusions with which the book deals.</p>
			<p>For this edition I have thought it worth while thoroughly to revise the whole of the book and to re-write the chapter on the payment of the French Indemnity, in order to clear up a misunderstanding to which in its first form it gave rise. Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> has also been re-written, in order to meet the changed form of criticism which has resulted from the discussion of this subject during the last year or two.</p>
			<p>It is with very great regret that I have seen this book grow in bulk; but as it constitutes the statement of a thesis still revolutionary, it has to cover the whole ground of the discussion, sometimes in great detail. I have, however, adopted an arrangement and method of presentation by which, I trust, the increase in bulk will not render it less clear. The general arrangement is as follows:</p>
			<p>The Synopsis is a very brief indication of the scope of the whole argument, which is not that war is impossible, but that it is futile⁠—useless, even when completely victorious, as a means of securing those moral or material ends which represent the needs of modern civilized peoples; and that on a general realization of this truth depends the solution of the problem of armaments and warfare.</p>
			<p>The general economic argument is summarized in Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.</p>
			<p>The moral, psychological, and biological argument is summarized in Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.</p>
			<p>The practical outcome⁠—what should be our policy with reference to defence, why progress depends upon the improvement of public opinion and the best general methods of securing that⁠—is discussed in Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.</p>
			<p>This method of treatment has involved some small repetition of fact and illustration, but the repetition is trifling in bulk⁠—it does not amount in all to the value of more than three or four pages⁠—and I have been more concerned to make the matter in hand clear to the reader than to observe all the literary canons. I may add that, apart from this, the process of condensation has been carried to its extreme limit for the character of data dealt with, and that those who desire to understand thoroughly the significance of the thesis with which the book deals⁠—it is worth understanding⁠—had really better read every line of it!</p>
			<p>One personal word may perhaps be excused as explaining certain phraseology, which would seem to indicate that the author is of English nationality. He happens to be of English birth, but to have passed his youth and early manhood in the United States, having acquired American citizenship there. This I hope entitles him to use the collective “we” on both sides of the Atlantic. I may add that the last fifteen years have been passed mainly in Europe studying at first hand the problems here dealt with.</p>
			<p>
				<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N. A.</abbr>
			</p>
			<p>London, October, 1913.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
